
On the new forcers of Conscience under the Long PARLIAMENT.


Because you have thrown of your Prelate Lord,
And with stiff Vowes renounc'd his Liturgie
To seise the widdow'd whore Pluralitie
>From them whose sin ye envi'd, not abhor'd,
Dare ye for this adjure the Civill Sword
To force our Consciences that Christ set free,
And ride us with a classic Hierarchy
Taught ye by meer A. S. and Rotherford?
Men whose Life, Learning, Faith and pure intent
Would have been held in high esteem with Paul                        10
Must now he nam'd and printed Hereticks
By shallow Edwards and Scotch what d'ye call:
But we do hope to find out all your tricks,
Your plots and packing wors then those of Trent,
That so the Parliament
May with their wholsom and preventive Shears
Clip your Phylacteries, though bauk your Ears,
And succour our just Fears
When they shall read this clearly in your charge
New Presbyter is but Old Priest Writ Large.                          20


The four following sonnets were not published until 1694, and
then in a mangled form by Phillips, in his Life of Milton; they
are here printed from the Cambridge MS., where that to Fairfax
is in Milton's autograph.



ON THE LORD GEN. FAIRFAX AT THE SEIGE OF COLCHESTER.


Fairfax, whose name in armes through Europe rings
Filling each mouth with envy, or with praise,
And all her jealous monarchs with amaze,
And rumors loud, that daunt remotest kings,
Thy firm unshak'n vertue ever brings
Victory home, though new rebellions raise
Their Hydra heads, & the fals North displaies
Her brok'n league, to impe their serpent wings,
O yet a nobler task awaites thy hand;
Yet what can Warr, but endless warr still breed,                     10
Till Truth, & Right from Violence be freed,
And Public Faith cleard from the shamefull brand
Of Public Fraud.  In vain doth Valour bleed
While Avarice, & Rapine share the land.



To the Lord Generall Cromwell May 1652.
ON THE PROPOSALLS OF CERTAINE MINISTERS AT THE COMMITTEE FOR
PROPAGATION OF THE GOSPELL.


Cromwell, our cheif of men, who through a cloud
Not of warr onely, but detractions rude,
Guided by faith & matchless Fortitude
To peace & truth thy glorious way hast plough'd,
And on the neck of crowned Fortune proud
Hast reard Gods Trophies, & his work pursu'd,
While Darwen stream with blood of Scotts imbru'd,
And Dunbarr field resounds thy praises loud,
And Worsters laureat wreath; yet much remaines
To conquer still; peace hath her victories                           10
No less renownd then warr, new foes aries
Threatning to bind our soules with secular chaines:
Helpe us to save free Conscience from the paw
Of hireling wolves whose Gospell is their maw.



TO SR HENRY VANE THE YOUNGER.


Vane, young in yeares, but in sage counsell old,
Then whome a better Senatour nere held
The helme of Rome, when gownes not armes repelld
The feirce Epeirot & the African bold,
Whether to settle peace, or to unfold
The drift of hollow states, hard to be spelld,
Then to advise how warr may best, upheld,
Move by her two maine nerves, Iron & Gold
In all her equipage: besides to know
Both spirituall powre & civill, what each meanes                     10
What severs each thou hast learnt, which few have don
The bounds of either sword to thee wee ow.
Therfore on thy firme hand religion leanes
In peace, & reck'ns thee her eldest son.



TO MR. CYRIACK SKINNER UPON HIS BLINDNESS.


Cyriack, this three years day these eys, though clear
To outward view, of blemish or of spot;
Bereft of light thir seeing have forgot,
Nor to thir idle orbs doth sight appear
Of Sun or Moon or Starre throughout the year,
Or man or woman.  Yet I argue not
Against heavns hand or will, nor bate a jot
Of heart or hope; but still bear vp and steer
Right onward.  What supports me, dost thou ask?
The conscience, Friend, to have lost them overply'd                  10
In libertyes defence, my noble task,
Of which all Europe talks from side to side.
This thought might lead me through the world's vain mask
Content though blind, had I no better guide.



PSAL. I.  Done into Verse,  1653.


BLESS'D is the man who hath not walk'd astray
In counsel of the wicked, and ith'way
Of sinners hath not stood, and in the seat
Of scorners hath not sate.  But in the great
Jehovahs Law is ever his delight,
And in his law he studies day and night.
He shall be as a tree which planted grows
By watry streams, and in his season knows
To yield his fruit, and his leaf shall not fall.
And what he takes in hand shall prosper all.                         10
Not so the wicked, but as chaff which fann'd
The wind drives, so the wicked shall not stand
In judgment, or abide their tryal then
Nor sinners in th'assembly of just men.
For the Lord knows th'upright way of the just
And the way of bad men to ruine must.



PSAL. II   Done Aug. 8. 1653. Terzetti.


WHY do the Gentiles tumult, and the Nations
Muse a vain thing, the Kings of th'earth upstand
With power, and Princes in their Congregations
Lay deep their plots together through each Land,
Against the Lord and his Messiah dear.
Let us break off; say they, by strength of hand
Their bonds, and cast from us, no more to wear,
Their twisted cords: he who in Heaven doth dwell
Shall laugh, the Lord shall scoff them, then severe
Speak to them in his wrath, and in his fell                          10
And fierce ire trouble them; but I saith hee
Anointed have my King (though ye rebell)
On Sion my holi' hill.  A firm decree
I will declare; the Lord to me hath say'd
Thou art my Son I have begotten thee
This day, ask of me, and the grant is made;
As thy possession I on thee bestow
Th'Heathen, and as thy conquest to be sway'd
Earths utmost bounds: them shalt thou bring full low
With Iron Sceptir bruis'd, and them disperse                         20
Like to a potters vessel shiver'd so.
And now be wise at length ye Kings averse
Be taught ye Judges of the earth; with fear
Jehovah serve and let your joy converse
With trembling;  Kiss the Son least he appear
In anger and ye perish in the way
If once his wrath take fire like fuel sere.
Happy all those who have in him their stay.



PSAL. III. Aug. 9. 1653
WHEN HE FLED FROM ABSALOM.


LORD how many are my foes
How many those
That in arms against me rise
Many are they
That of my life distrustfully thus say,
No help for him in God there lies.
But thou Lord art my shield my glory,
Thee through my story
Th' exalter of my head I count
Aloud I cry'd                                                        10
Unto Jehovah, he full soon reply'd
And heard me from his holy mount.
I lay and slept, I wak'd again,
For my sustain
Was the Lord.  Of many millions
The populous rout
I fear not though incamping round about
They pitch against me their Pavillions.
Rise Lord, save me my God for thou
Hast smote ere now                                                   20
On the cheek-bone all my foes,
Of men abhor'd
Hast broke the teeth.  This help was from the Lord;
Thy blessing on thy people flows.



PSAL. IV. Aug. 10.1653.


ANSWER me when I call
God of my righteousness;
In straights and in distress
Thou didst me disinthrall
And set at large; now spare,
Now pity me, and hear my earnest prai'r.

Great ones how long will ye
My glory have in scorn
How long be thus forlorn
Still to love vanity,                                                10
To love, to seek, to prize
Things false and vain and nothing else but lies?

Yet know the Lord hath chose
Chose to himself a part
The good and meek of heart
(For whom to chuse he knows)
Jehovah from on high
Will hear my voyce what time to him I crie.

Be aw'd, and do not sin,
Speak to your hearts alone,                                          20
Upon your beds, each one,
And be at peace within.
Offer the offerings just
Of righteousness and in Jehovah trust.

Many there be that say
Who yet will shew us good?
Talking like this worlds brood;
But Lord, thus let me pray,
On us lift up the light
Lift up the favour of thy count'nance bright.                        30

Into my heart more joy
And gladness thou hast put
Then when a year of glut
Their stores doth over-cloy
And from their plenteous grounds
With vast increase their corn and wine abounds.

In peace at once will I
Both lay me down and sleep
For thou alone dost keep
Me safe where ere I lie                                              40
As in a rocky Cell
Thou Lord alone in safety mak'st me dwell.



PSAL. V. Aug. 12.1653.


JEHOVAH to my words give ear
My meditation waigh
The voyce of my complaining hear
My King and God for unto thee I pray.
Jehovah thou my early voyce
Shalt in the morning hear
Ith'morning I to thee with choyce
Will rank my Prayers, and watch till thou appear.
For thou art not a God that takes
In wickedness delight                                                10
Evil with thee no biding makes
Fools or mad men stand not within thy sight.
All workers of iniquity
Thou wilt destroy that speak a ly
The bloodi' and guileful man God doth detest.
But I will in thy mercies dear
Thy numerous mercies go
Into thy house; I in thy fear
Will towards thy holy temple worship low.                            20
Lord lead me in thy righteousness
Lead me because of those
That do observe if I transgress,
Set thy wayes right before, where my step goes.
For in his faltring mouth unstable
No word is firm or sooth
Their inside, troubles miserable;
An open grave their throat, their tongue they smooth.
God, find them guilty, let them fall
By their own counsels quell'd;                                       30
Push them in their rebellions all
Still on; for against thee they have rebell'd;
Then all who trust in thee shall bring
Their joy, while thou from blame
Defend'st them, they shall ever sing
And shall triumph in thee, who love thy name.
For thou Jehovah wilt be found
To bless the just man still,
As with a shield thou wilt surround
Him with thy lasting favour and good will.                           40



PSAL. VI  Aug. 13. 1653.


LORD in thine anger do not reprehend me
Nor in thy hot displeasure me correct;
Pity me Lord for I am much deject
Am very weak and faint; heal and amend me,
For all my bones, that even with anguish ake,
Are troubled, yea my soul is troubled sore
And thou O Lord how long? turn Lord, restore
My soul, O save me for thy goodness sake
For in death no remembrance is of thee;
Who in the grave can celebrate thy praise?                           10
Wearied I am with sighing out my dayes.
Nightly my Couch I make a kind of Sea;
My Bed I water with my tears; mine Eie
Through grief consumes, is waxen old and dark
Ith' mid'st of all mine enemies that mark.
Depart all ye that work iniquitie.
Depart from me, for the voice of my weeping
The Lord hath heard, the Lord hath heard my prai'r
My supplication with acceptance fair
The Lord will own, and have me in his keeping.                       20
Mine enemies shall all be blank and dash't
With much confusion; then grow red with shame,
They shall return in hast the way they came
And in a moment shall be quite abash't.



PSAL. VII. Aug.  14. 1653.
UPON THE WORDS OF CHUSH THE BENJAMITE AGAINST HIM.


Lord my God to thee I flie
Save me and secure me under
Thy protection while I crie
Least as a Lion (and no wonder)
He hast to tear my Soul asunder
Tearing and no rescue nigh.

Lord my God if I have thought
Or done this, if wickedness
Be in my hands, if I have wrought
Ill to him that meant me peace,                                      10
Or to him have render'd less,
And fre'd my foe for naught;

Let th'enemy pursue my soul
And overtake it, let him tread
My life down to the earth and roul
In the dust my glory dead,
In the dust and there out spread
Lodge it with dishonour foul.

Rise Jehovah in thine ire
Rouze thy self amidst the rage                                       20
Of my foes that urge like fire;
And wake for me, their furi' asswage;
Judgment here thou didst ingage
And command which I desire.

So th' assemblies of each Nation
Will surround thee, seeking right,
Thence to thy glorious habitation
Return on high and in their sight.
Jehovah judgeth most upright
All people from the worlds foundation.                               30

Judge me Lord, be judge in this
According to my righteousness
And the innocence which is
Upon me: cause at length to cease
Of evil men the wickedness
And their power that do amiss.

But the just establish fast,
Since thou art the just God that tries
Hearts and reins.  On God is cast
My defence, and in him lies                                          40
In him who both just and wise
Saves th' upright of Heart at last.

God is a just Judge and severe,
And God is every day offended;
If th' unjust will not forbear,
His Sword he whets, his Bow hath bended
Already, and for him intended
The tools of death, that waits him near.

(His arrows purposely made he
For them that persecute.)  Behold                                    50
He travels big with vanitie,
Trouble he hath conceav'd of old
As in a womb, and from that mould
Hath at length brought forth a Lie.

He dig'd a pit, and delv'd it deep,
And fell into the pit he made,
His mischief that due course doth keep,
Turns on his head, and his ill trade
Of violence will undelay'd
Fall on his crown with ruine steep.                                  60

Then will I Jehovah's praise
According to his justice raise
And sing the Name and Deitie
Of Jehovah the most high.



PSAL. VIII. Aug. 14. 1653.


O JEHOVAH our Lord how wondrous great
And glorious is thy name through all the earth?
So as above the Heavens thy praise to set
Out of the tender mouths of latest bearth,

Out of the mouths of babes and sucklings thou
Hast founded strength because of all thy foes
To stint th'enemy, and slack th'avengers brow
That bends his rage thy providence to oppose.

When I behold thy Heavens, thy Fingers art,
The Moon and Starrs which thou so bright hast set,                   10
In the pure firmament, then saith my heart,
O What is man that thou remembrest yet,

And think'st upon him; or of man begot
That him thou visit'st and of him art found;
Scarce to be less then Gods, thou mad'st his lot,
With honour and with state thou hast him crown'd.

O're the works of thy hand thou mad'st him Lord,
Thou hast put all under his lordly feet,
All Flocks, and Herds, by thy commanding word,
All beasts that in the field or forrest meet.                        20

Fowl of the Heavens, and Fish that through the wet
Sea-paths in shoals do slide. And know no dearth.
O Jehovah our Lord how wondrous great
And glorious is thy name through all the earth.




April, 1648.  J. M.
Nine of the Psalms done into Metre, wherein all but what is
in a different Character, are the very words of the Text,
translated from the Original.



PSAL. LXXX.


1   THOU Shepherd that dost Israel keep
    Give ear in time of need,
    Who leadest like a flock of sheep
    Thy loved Josephs seed,
    That sitt'st between the Cherubs bright
    Between their wings out-spread
    Shine forth, and from thy cloud give light,
    And on our foes thy dread.
2   In Ephraims view and Benjamins,
    And in Manasse's sight                                           10
    Awake* thy strength, come, and be seen                    *Gnorera.
    To save us by thy might.
3   Turn us again, thy grace divine
    To us O God vouchsafe;
    Cause thou thy face on us to shine
    And then we shall be safe.
4   Lord God of Hosts, how long wilt thou,
    How long wilt thou declare
    Thy *smoaking wrath, and angry brow                     *Gnashanta.
    Against thy peoples praire.                                      20
5   Thou feed'st them with the bread of tears,
    Their bread with tears they eat,
    And mak'st them* largely drink the tears                  *Shalish.
    Wherewith their cheeks are wet.
6   A strife thou mak'st us and a prey
    To every neighbour foe,
    Among themselves they *laugh, they *play,                *Jilgnagu.
    And *flouts at us they throw.
7   Return us, and thy grace divine,
    O God of Hosts vouchsafe                                         30
    Cause thou thy face on us to shine,
    And then we shall be safe.
8   A Vine from Aegypt thou hast brought,
    Thy free love made it thine,
    And drov'st out Nations proud and haut
    To plant this lovely Vine.
9   Thou did'st prepare for it a place
    And root it deep and fast
    That it began to grow apace,
    And fill'd the land at last.                                     40
10  With her green shade that cover'd all,
    The Hills were over-spread
    Her Bows as high as Cedars tall
    Advanc'd their lofty head.
11  Her branches on the western side
    Down to the Sea she sent,
    And upward to that river wide
    Her other branches went.
12  Why hast thou laid her Hedges low
    And brok'n down her Fence,                                       50
    That all may pluck her, as they go,
    With rudest violence?
13  The tusked Boar out of the wood
    Up turns it by the roots,
    Wild Beasts there brouze, and make their food
    Her Grapes and tender Shoots.
14  Return now, God of Hosts, look down
    From Heav'n, thy Seat divine,
    Behold us, but without a frown,
    And visit this thy Vine.                                         60
15  Visit this Vine, which thy right hand
    Hath set, and planted long,
    And the young branch, that for thy self
    Thou hast made firm and strong.
16  But now it is consum'd with fire,
    And cut with Axes down,
    They perish at thy dreadfull ire,
    At thy rebuke and frown.
17  Upon the man of thy right hand
    Let thy good hand be laid,                                       70
    Upon the Son of Man, whom thou
    Strong for thyself hast made.
18  So shall we not go back from thee
    To wayes of sin and shame,
    Quick'n us thou, then gladly wee
    Shall call upon thy Name.
    Return us, and thy grace divine
    Lord God of Hosts voutsafe,
    Cause thou thy face on us to shine,
    And then we shall be safe.                                       80



PSAL. LXXXI.


1   To God our strength sing loud, and clear,
    Sing loud to God our King,
    To Jacobs God, that all may hear
    Loud acclamations ring.
2   Prepare a Hymn, prepare a Song
    The Timbrel hither bring
    The cheerfull Psaltry bring along
    And Harp with pleasant string.
3   Blow, as is wont, in the new Moon
    With Trumpets lofty sound,                                       10
    Th'appointed time, the day wheron
    Our solemn Feast comes round.
4   This was a Statute giv'n of old
    For Israel to observe
    A Law of Jacobs God, to hold
    From whence they might not swerve.
5   This he a Testimony ordain'd
    In Joseph, not to change,
    When as he pass'd through Aegypt land;
    The Tongue I heard, was strange.                                 20
6   From burden, and from slavish toyle
    I set his shoulder free;
    His hands from pots, and mirie soyle
    Deliver'd were by me.
7   When trouble did thee sore assaile,
    On me then didst thou call,
    And I to free thee did not faile,
    And led thee out of thrall.
    I answer'd thee in *thunder deep                 *Be Sether ragnam.
    With clouds encompass'd round;                                   30
    I tri'd thee at the water steep
    Of Meriba renown'd.
8   Hear O my people, heark'n well,
    I testifie to thee
    Thou antient flock of Israel,
    If thou wilt list to mee,
9   Through out the land of thy abode
    No alien God shall be
    Nor shalt thou to a forein God
    In honour bend thy knee.                                         40
10  I am the Lord thy God which brought
    Thee out of Aegypt land
    Ask large enough, and I, besought,
    Will grant thy full demand.
11  And yet my people would not hear,
    Nor hearken to my voice;
    And Israel whom I lov'd so dear
    Mislik'd me for his choice.
12  Then did I leave them to their will
    And to their wandring mind;                                      50
    Their own conceits they follow'd still
    Their own devises blind
13  O that my people would be wise
    To serve me all their daies,
    And O that Israel would advise
    To walk my righteous waies.
14  Then would I soon bring down their foes
    That now so proudly rise,
    And turn my hand against all those
    That are their enemies.                                          60
15  Who hate the Lord should then be fain
    To bow to him and bend,
    But they, His should remain,
    Their time should have no end.
16  And he would free them from the shock
    With flower of finest wheat,
    And satisfie them from the rock
    With Honey for their Meat.



PSAL. LXXXII.


1   GOD in the *great *assembly stands                    *Bagnadath-el
    Of Kings and lordly States,
    Among the gods* on both his hands.                        *Bekerev.
    He judges and debates.
2   How long will ye *pervert the right                      *Tishphetu
    With *judgment false and wrong                              gnavel.
    Favouring the wicked by your might,
    Who thence grow bold and strong?
3  *Regard the *weak and fatherless                       *Shiphtu-dal.
   *Dispatch the *poor mans cause,                                   10
    And **raise the man in deep distress
    By **just and equal Lawes.                              **Hatzdiku.
4   Defend the poor and desolate,
    And rescue from the hands
    Of wicked men the low estate
    Of him that help demands.
5   They know not nor will understand,
    In darkness they walk on,
    The Earths foundations all are *mov'd                     *Jimmotu.
    And *out of order gon.                                           20
6   I said that ye were Gods, yea all
    The Sons of God most high
7   But ye shall die like men, and fall
    As other Princes die.
8   Rise God, *judge thou the earth in might,
    This wicked earth *redress,                               *Shiphta.
    For thou art he who shalt by right
    The Nations all possess.




PSAL. LXXXIII.

1   BE not thou silent now at length
    O God hold not thy peace,
    Sit not thou still O God of strength
    We cry and do not cease.
2   For lo thy furious foes now *swell
    And *storm outrageously,                                *Jehemajun.
    And they that hate thee proud and fill
    Exalt their heads full hie.
3   Against thy people they *contrive                       *Jagnarimu.
   *Their Plots and Counsels deep,                             *Sod. 10
   *Them to ensnare they chiefly strive             *Jithjagnatsu gnal.
   *Whom thou dost hide and keep.                          *Tsephuneca.
4   Come let us cut them off say they,
    Till they no Nation be
    That Israels name for ever may
    Be lost in memory.
5   For they consult *with all their might,               *Lev jachdau.
    And all as one in mind
    Themselves against thee they unite
    And in firm union bind.                                          20
6   The tents of Edom, and the brood
    Of scornful Ishmael,
    Moab, with them of Hagars blood
    That in the Desart dwell,
7   Gebal and Ammon there conspire,
    And hateful Amalec,
    The Philistims, and they of Tyre
    Whose bounds the sea doth check.
8   With them great Asshur also bands
    And doth confirm the knot,                                       30
    All these have lent their armed hands
    To aid the Sons of Lot.
9   Do to them as to Midian bold
    That wasted all the Coast.
    To Sisera, and as is told
    Thou didst to Jabins hoast,
    When at the brook of Kishon old
    They were repulst and slain,
10  At Endor quite cut off, and rowl'd
    As dung upon the plain.                                          40
11  As Zeb and Oreb evil sped
    So let their Princes speed
    As Zeba, and Zalmunna bled
    So let their Princes bleed.
12  For they amidst their pride have said
    By right now shall we seize
    Gods houses, and will now invade
   *Their stately Palaces.                    *Neoth Elohim bears both.
13  My God, oh make them as a wheel
    No quiet let them find,                                          50
    Giddy and restless let them reel
    Like stubble from the wind.
14  As when an aged wood takes fire
    Which on a sudden straies,
    The greedy flame runs hier and hier
    Till all the mountains blaze,
15  So with thy whirlwind them pursue,
    And with thy tempest chase;
16 *And till they *yield thee honour due,                *They seek thy
    Lord fill with shame their face.                         Name. Heb.
17  Asham'd and troubl'd let them be,                                60
    Troubl'd and sham'd for ever,
    Ever confounded, and so die
    With shame, and scape it never.
18  Then shall they know that thou whose name
    Jehova is alone,
    Art the most high, and thou the same
    O're all the earth art one.



PSAL. LXXXIV.


1   How lovely are thy dwellings fair!
    O Lord of Hoasts, how dear
    The pleasant Tabernacles are!
    Where thou do'st dwell so near.
2   My Soul doth long and almost die
    Thy Courts O Lord to see,
    My heart and flesh aloud do crie,
    O living God, for thee.
3   There ev'n the Sparrow freed from wrong
    Hath found a house of rest,                                      10
    The Swallow there, to lay her young
    Hath built her brooding nest,
    Ev'n by thy Altars Lord of Hoasts
    They find their safe abode,
    And home they fly from round the Coasts
    Toward thee, My King, my God
4   Happy, who in thy house reside
    Where thee they ever praise,
5   Happy, whose strength in thee doth bide,
    And in their hearts thy waies.                                   20
6   They pass through Baca's thirstie Vale,
    That dry and barren ground
    As through a fruitfull watry Dale
    Where Springs and Showrs abound.
7   They journey on from strength to strength
    With joy and gladsom cheer
    Till all before our God at length
    In Sion do appear.
8   Lord God of Hoasts hear now my praier
    O Jacobs God give ear,                                           30
9   Thou God our shield look on the face
    Of thy anointed dear.
10  For one day in thy Courts to be
    Is better, and mere blest
    Then in the joyes of Vanity,
    A thousand daies at best.
    I in the temple of my God
    Had rather keep a dore,
    Then dwell in Tents, and rich abode
    With Sin for evermore                                            40
11  For God the Lord both Sun and Shield
    Gives grace and glory bright,
    No good from him shall be with-held
    Whose waies are just and right.
12  Lord God of Hoasts that raign 'st on high,
    That man is truly blest
    Who only on thee doth relie.
    And in thee only rest.



PSAL LXXXV.


1   THY Land to favour graciously
    Thou hast not Lord been slack,
    Thou hast from hard Captivity
    Returned Jacob back.
2   Th' iniquity thou didst forgive
    That wrought thy people woe,
    And all their Sin, that did thee grieve
    Hast hid where none shall know.
3   Thine anger all thou hadst remov'd,
    And calmly didst return                                          10
    From thy *fierce wrath which we had prov'd        *Heb. The burning
    Far worse then fire to burn.                            heat of thy
4   God of our saving health and peace,                          wrath.
    Turn us, and us restore,
    Thine indignation cause to cease
    Toward us, and chide no more.
5   Wilt thou be angry without end,
    For ever angry thus
    Wilt thou thy frowning ire extend
    From age to age on us?                                           20
6   Wilt thou not * turn, and hear our voice             * Heb. Turn to
    And us again * revive ,                                 quicken us.
    That so thy people may rejoyce
    By thee preserv'd alive.
7   Cause us to see thy goodness Lord,
    To us thy mercy shew
    Thy saving health to us afford
    And lift in us renew.
8   And now what God the Lord will speak
    I will go strait and hear,                                       30
    For to his people he speaks peace
    And to his Saints full dear,
    To his dear Saints he will speak peace,
    But let them never more
    Return to folly, but surcease
    To trespass as before.
9   Surely to such as do him fear
    Salvation is at hand
    And glory shall ere long appear
    To dwell within our Land.                                        40
10  Mercy and Truth that long were miss'd
    Now joyfully are met
    Sweet Peace and Righteousness have kiss'd
    And hand in hand are set.
11  Truth from the earth like to a flowr
    Shall bud and blossom then,
    And Justice from her heavenly bowr
    Look down on mortal men.
12  The Lord will also then bestow
    Whatever thing is good                                           50
    Our Land shall forth in plenty throw
    Her fruits to be our food.
13  Before him Righteousness shall go
    His Royal Harbinger,
    Then * will he come, and not be slow          *Heb. He will set his
    His footsteps cannot err.                         steps to the way.



PSAL. LXXXVI.


1   THY gracious ear, O Lord, encline,
    O hear me I thee pray,
    For I am poor, and almost pine
    With need, and sad decay.
2   Preserve my soul, for *I have trod           Heb. I am good, loving,
    Thy waies, and love the just,                    a doer of good and
    Save thou thy servant O my God                          holy things
    Who still in thee doth trust.
3   Pity me Lord for daily thee
    I call; 4 O make rejoyce                                         10
    Thy Servants Soul; for Lord to thee
    I lift my soul and voice,
5   For thou art good, thou Lord art prone
    To pardon, thou to all
    Art full of mercy, thou alone
    To them that on thee call.
6   Unto my supplication Lord
    Give ear, and to the crie
    Of my incessant praiers afford
    Thy hearing graciously.                                          20
7   I in the day of my distress
    Will call on thee for aid;
    For thou wilt grant me free access
    And answer, what I pray'd.
8   Like thee among the gods is none
    O Lord, nor any works
    Of all that other Gods have done
    Like to thy glorious works.
9   The Nations all whom thou hast made
    Shall come, and all shall frame                                  30
    To bow them low before thee Lord,
    And glorifie thy name.
10  For great thou art, and wonders great
    By thy strong hand are done,
    Thou in thy everlasting Seat
    Remainest God alone.
11  Teach me O Lord thy way most right,
    I in thy truth will hide,
    To fear thy name my heart unite
    So shall it never slide.                                         40
12  Thee will I praise O Lord my God
    Thee honour, and adore
    With my whole heart, and blaze abroad
    Thy name for ever more.
13  For great thy mercy is toward me,
    And thou hast free'd my Soul
    Eev'n from the lowest Hell set free
    From deepest darkness foul.
14  O God the proud against me rise
    And violent men are met                                          50
    To seek my life, and in their eyes
    No fear of thee have set.
15  But thou Lord art the God most mild
    Readiest thy grace to shew,
    Slow to be angry, and art stil'd
    Most mercifull, most true.
16  O turn to me thy face at length,
    And me have mercy on,
    Unto thy servant give thy strength,
    And save thy hand-maids Son.                                     60
17  Some sign of good to me afford,
    And let my foes then see
    And be asham'd, because thou Lord
    Do'st help and comfort me.



PSAL. LXXXVII


1   AMONG the holy Mountains high
    Is his foundation fast,
    There Seated in his Sanctuary,
    His Temple there is plac't.
2   Sions fair Gates the Lord loves more
    Then all the dwellings faire
    Of Jacobs Land, though there be store,
    And all within his care.
3   City of God, most glorious things
    Of thee abroad are spoke;                                        10
4   I mention Egypt, where proud Kings
    Did our forefathers yoke,
    I mention Babel to my friends,
    Philistia full of scorn,
    And Tyre with Ethiops utmost ends,
    Lo this man there was born:
5   But twise that praise shall in our ear
    Be said of Sion last
    This and this man was born in her,
    High God shall fix her fast.                                     20
6   The Lord shall write it in a Scrowle
    That ne're shall be out-worn
    When he the Nations doth enrowle
    That this man there was born.
7   Both they who sing, and they who dance
    With sacred Songs are there,
    In thee fresh brooks, and soft streams glance
    And all my fountains clear.



PSAL. LXXXVIII


1   LORD God that dost me save and keep,
    All day to thee I cry;
    And all night long, before thee weep
    Before thee prostrate lie.
2   Into thy presence let my praier
    With sighs devout ascend
    And to my cries, that ceaseless are,
    Thine ear with favour bend.
3   For cloy'd with woes and trouble store
    Surcharg'd my Soul doth lie,                                     10
    My life at death's uncherful dore
    Unto the grave draws nigh.
4   Reck'n'd I am with them that pass
    Down to the dismal pit
    I am a *man, but weak alas               * Heb. A man without manly
    And for that name unfit.                                  strength.
5   From life discharg'd and parted quite
    Among the dead to sleep
    And like the slain in bloody fight
    That in the grave lie deep.                                      20
    Whom thou rememberest no more,
    Dost never more regard,
    Them from thy hand deliver'd o're
    Deaths hideous house hath barr'd.
6   Thou in the lowest pit profound'
    Hast set me all forlorn,
    Where thickest darkness hovers round,
    In horrid deeps to mourn.
7   Thy wrath from which no shelter saves
    Full sore doth press on me;                                      30
   *Thou break'st upon me all thy waves,                      *The Heb.
   *And all thy waves break me                              bears both.
8   Thou dost my friends from me estrange,
    And mak'st me odious,
    Me to them odious, for they change,
    And I here pent up thus.
9   Through sorrow, and affliction great
    Mine eye grows dim and dead,
    Lord all the day I thee entreat,
    My hands to thee I spread.                                       40
10  Wilt thou do wonders on the dead,
    Shall the deceas'd arise
    And praise thee from their loathsom bed
    With pale and hollow eyes ?
11  Shall they thy loving kindness tell
    On whom the grave hath hold,
    Or they who in perdition dwell
    Thy faithfulness unfold?
12  In darkness can thy mighty hand
    Or wondrous acts be known,                                       50
    Thy justice in the gloomy land
    Of dark oblivion?
13  But I to thee O Lord do cry
    E're yet my life be spent,
    And up to thee my praier doth hie
    Each morn, and thee prevent.
14  Why wilt thou Lord my soul forsake,
    And hide thy face from me,
15  That am already bruis'd, and *shake          *Heb. Prae Concussione.
    With terror sent from thee;                                      60
    Bruz'd, and afflicted and so low
    As ready to expire,
    While I thy terrors undergo
    Astonish'd with thine ire.
16  Thy fierce wrath over me doth flow
    Thy threatnings cut me through.
17  All day they round about me go,
    Like waves they me persue.
18  Lover and friend thou hast remov'd
    And sever'd from me far.                                         70
    They fly me now whom I have lov'd,
    And as in darkness are.


Finis.




COLLECTION OF PASSAGES TRANSLATED IN THE PROSE WRITINGS.



[From Of Reformation in England, 1641.]


Ah Constantine, of how much ill was cause
Not thy Conversion, but those rich demains
That the first wealthy Pope receiv'd of thee.
DANTE, Inf. xix. 115.

Founded in chast and humble Poverty,
'Gainst them that rais'd thee dost thou lift thy horn,
Impudent whoore, where hast thou plac'd thy hope?
In thy Adulterers, or thy ill got wealth?
Another Constantine comes not in hast.
PETRARCA, Son. 108.

And to be short, at last his guid him brings
Into a goodly valley, where he sees
A mighty mass of things strangely confus'd
Things that on earth were lost or were abus'd.
    .       .       .       .       .
Then past he to a flowry Mountain green,
Which once smelt sweet, now stinks as odiously;
This was that gift (if you the truth will have)
That Constantine to good Sylvestro gave.
ARIOSTO, Orl. Fur. xxxiv. 80.



[From Reason of Church Government,  1641.]


When I die, let the Earth be roul'd in flames.



[From Apology for Smectymnuus, 1642.]


Laughing to teach the truth
What hinders? as some teachers give to Boys
Junkets and knacks, that they may learne apace.
HORACE, Sat. 1. 24.

Jesting decides great things
Stronglier, and better oft than earnest can.
IBID. i. 10. 14.

'Tis you that say it, not I: you do the deeds
And your ungodly deeds find me the words.
SOPHOCLES, Elec. 624.



[From Areopagitica, 1644.]


This is true Liberty, when free-born Men,
Having to advise the Public, may speak free,
Which he who can, and will, deserv's high praise;
Who neither can nor will, may hold his peace,
What can be juster in a state then this?
EURIPIDES, Supp. 438



[From Tetrachordon, 1645.]


Whom do we count a good man, whom but he
Who keeps the laws and statutes of the Senate,
Who judges in great suits and controversies,
Whose witness and opinion wins the cause?
But his own house, and the whole neighbourhood
See his foul inside through his whited skin.
HORACE, Ep. i. 16. 40.



[From The Tenure of Kings and Magistrates, 1649.]


                       There can be slaine
No sacrifice to God more acceptable
Than an unjust and wicked king.
SENECA, Herc. Fur. 922.



[From History of Britain, 1670.]


Brutus thus addresses Diana in the country of Leogecia.

Goddess of Shades, and Huntress, who at will
Walk'st on the rowling Sphear, and through the deep,
On thy third Reign the Earth look now, and tell
What Land, what Seat of rest thou bidst me seek,
What certain Seat, where I may worship thee
For aye, with Temples vow'd, and Virgin quires.

To whom sleeping before the altar, Diana in a Vision that night
thus answer'd.

Brutus far to the West, in th' Ocean wide
Beyond the Realm of Gaul, a Land there lies,
Sea-girt it lies, where Giants dwelt of old,
Now void, it fits thy People; thether bend
Thy course, there shalt thou find a lasting seat,
There to thy Sons another Troy shall rise,
And Kings be born of thee, whose dredded might
Shall aw the World, and conquer Nations bold.




Transcriber's Note: Title page of first (1667) edition of
Paradise Lost follows:




                          SAMSON
                         AGONISTES,
                            A
                      DRAMATIC POEM.
------------------------------------------------------------
                        The Author
                        JOHN MILTON
------------------------------------------------------------
                   Aristot. Poet. Cap. 6.
           Tragedia mimeis praxeos spadaias, &c.
Tragedia est imitatio actionis seriae. &c. Per misericordiam &
   metum perficiens talium affectuum lustrationem.
------------------------------------------------------------
------------------------------------------------------------
                          LONDON.
           Printed by J.M. for John Starkey at the
            Mitre in Fleetstreet, near Temple-Bar.
                          MDCLXXI



SAMSON AGONISTES



Of that sort of Dramatic Poem which is call'd Tragedy.


TRAGEDY, as it was antiently compos'd, hath been ever held the
gravest, moralest, and most profitable of all other Poems:
therefore said by Aristotle to be of power by raising pity and fear,
or terror, to purge the mind of those and such like passions, that is
to temper and reduce them to just measure with a kind of delight,
stirr'd up by reading or seeing those passions well imitated. Nor is
Nature wanting in her own effects to make good his assertion: for
so in Physic things of melancholic hue and quality are us'd against
melancholy, sowr against sowr, salt to remove salt humours.
Hence Philosophers and other gravest Writers, as Cicero, Plutarch
and others, frequently cite out of Tragic Poets, both to adorn and
illustrate thir discourse.  The Apostle Paul himself thought it not
unworthy to insert a verse of Euripides into the Text of Holy
Scripture, I Cor. 15. 33. and Paraeus commenting on the
Revelation, divides the whole Book as a Tragedy, into Acts
distinguisht each by a Chorus of Heavenly Harpings and Song
between.  Heretofore Men in highest dignity have labour'd not a
little to be thought able to compose a Tragedy.  Of that honour
Dionysius the elder was no less ambitious, then before of his
attaining to the Tyranny. Augustus Caesar also had begun his
Ajax, but unable to please his own judgment with what he had
begun. left it unfinisht.  Seneca the Philosopher is by some thought
the Author of those Tragedies (at lest the best of them) that go
under that name.  Gregory Nazianzen a Father of the Church,
thought it not unbeseeming the sanctity of his person to write a
Tragedy which he entitl'd, Christ suffering. This is mention'd to
vindicate Tragedy from the small esteem, or rather infamy, which
in the account of many it undergoes at this day with other common
Interludes; hap'ning through the Poets error of intermixing Comic
stuff with Tragic sadness and gravity; or introducing trivial and
vulgar persons, which by all judicious hath bin counted absurd; and
brought in without discretion, corruptly to gratifie the people. And
though antient Tragedy use no Prologue, yet using sometimes, in
case of self defence, or explanation, that which Martial calls an
Epistle; in behalf of this Tragedy coming forth after the antient
manner, much different from what among us passes for best, thus
much before-hand may be Epistl'd; that Chorus is here introduc'd
after the Greek manner, not antient only but modern, and still in
use among the Italians. In the modelling therefore of this Poem
with good reason, the Antients and Italians are rather follow'd, as
of much more authority and fame. The measure of Verse us'd in
the Chorus is of all sorts, call'd by the Greeks Monostrophic, or
rather Apolelymenon, without regard had to Strophe, Antistrophe
or Epod, which were a kind of Stanza's fram'd only for the Music,
then us'd with the Chorus that sung; not essential to the Poem, and
therefore not material; or being divided into Stanza's or Pauses
they may be call'd Allaeostropha.  Division into Act and Scene
referring chiefly to the Stage (to which this work never was
intended) is here omitted.

 It suffices if the whole Drama be found not produc't beyond the
fift Act, of the style and uniformitie, and that commonly call'd the
Plot, whether intricate or explicit, which is nothing indeed but such
oeconomy, or disposition of the fable as may stand best with
verisimilitude and decorum; they only will best judge who are not
unacquainted with Aeschulus, Sophocles, and Euripides, the three
Tragic Poets unequall'd yet by any, and the best rule to all who
endeavour to write Tragedy. The circumscription of time wherein
the whole Drama begins and ends, is according to antient rule, and
best example, within the space of 24 hours.



The ARGUMENT.


Samson made Captive, Blind, and now in the Prison at Gaza, there
to labour as in a common work-house, on a Festival day, in the
general cessation from labour, comes forth into the open Air, to a
place nigh, somewhat retir'd there to sit a while and bemoan his
condition. Where he happens at length to be visited by certain
friends and equals of his tribe, which make the Chorus, who seek
to comfort him what they can ; then by his old Father Manoa, who
endeavours the like, and withal tells him his purpose to procure his
liberty by ransom; lastly, that this Feast was proclaim'd by the
Philistins as a day of Thanksgiving for thir deliverance from the
hands of Samson, which yet more troubles him.  Manoa then
departs to prosecute his endeavour with the Philistian Lords for
Samson's redemption; who in the mean while is visited by other
persons; and lastly by a publick Officer to require coming to the
Feast before the Lords and People, to play or shew his strength in
thir presence; he at first refuses, dismissing the publick officer with
absolute denyal to come; at length perswaded inwardly that this
was from God, he yields to go along with him, who came now the
second time with great threatnings to fetch him; the Chorus yet
remaining on the place, Manoa returns full of joyful hope, to
procure e're long his Sons deliverance: in the midst of which
discourse an Ebrew comes in haste confusedly at first; and
afterward more distinctly relating the Catastrophe, what Samson
had done to the Philistins, and by accident to himself; wherewith
the Tragedy ends.


The Persons

Samson.
Manoa the father of Samson.
Dalila his wife.
Harapha of Gath.
Publick Officer.
Messenger.
Chorus of Danites


The Scene before the Prison in Gaza.

Sam:  A little onward lend thy guiding hand
To these dark steps, a little further on;
For yonder bank hath choice of Sun or shade,
There I am wont to sit, when any chance
Relieves me from my task of servile toyl,
Daily in the common Prison else enjoyn'd me,
Where I a Prisoner chain'd, scarce freely draw
The air imprison'd also, close and damp,
Unwholsom draught: but here I feel amends,
The breath of Heav'n fresh-blowing, pure and sweet,                  10
With day-spring born; here leave me to respire.
This day a solemn Feast the people hold
To Dagon thir Sea-Idol, and forbid
Laborious works, unwillingly this rest
Thir Superstition yields me; hence with leave
Retiring from the popular noise, I seek
This unfrequented place to find some ease,
Ease to the body some, none to the mind
>From restless thoughts, that like a deadly swarm
Of Hornets arm'd, no sooner found alone,                             20
But rush upon me thronging, and present
Times past, what once I was, and what am now.
O wherefore was my birth from Heaven foretold
Twice by an Angel, who at last in sight
Of both my Parents all in flames ascended
>From off the Altar, where an Off'ring burn'd,
As in a fiery column charioting
His Godlike presence, and from some great act
Or benefit reveal'd to Abraham's race?
Why was my breeding order'd and prescrib'd                           30
As of a person separate to God,
Design'd for great exploits; if I must dye
Betray'd, Captiv'd, and both my Eyes put out,
Made of my Enemies the scorn and gaze;
To grind in Brazen Fetters under task
With this Heav'n-gifted strength? O glorious strength
Put to the labour of a Beast, debas't
Lower then bondslave! Promise was that I
Should Israel from Philistian yoke deliver;
Ask for this great Deliverer now, and find him                       40
Eyeless in Gaza at the Mill with slaves,
Himself in bonds under Philistian yoke;
Yet stay, let me not rashly call in doubt
Divine Prediction; what if all foretold
Had been fulfilld but through mine own default,
Whom have I to complain of but my self?
Who this high gift of strength committed to me,
In what part lodg'd, how easily bereft me,
Under the Seal of silence could not keep,
But weakly to a woman must reveal it                                 50
O'recome with importunity and tears.
O impotence of mind, in body strong !
But what is strength without a double share
Of wisdom, vast, unwieldy, burdensom,
Proudly secure, yet liable to fall
By weakest suttleties, not made to rule,
But to subserve where wisdom bears command.
God, when he gave me strength, to shew withal
How slight the gift was, hung it in my Hair.
But peace, I must not quarrel with the will                          60
Of highest dispensation, which herein
Happ'ly had ends above my reach to know:
Suffices that to me strength is my bane,
And proves the sourse of all my miseries;
So many, and so huge, that each apart
Would ask a life to wail, but chief of all,
O loss of sight, of thee I most complain!
Blind among enemies, O worse then chains,
Dungeon, or beggery, or decrepit age!
Light the prime work of God to me is extinct,
And all her various objects of delight
Annull'd, which might in part my grief have eas'd,
Inferiour to the vilest now become
Of man or worm; the vilest here excel me,
They creep, yet see, I dark in light expos'd
To daily fraud, contempt, abuse and wrong,
Within doors, or without, still as a fool,
In power of others, never in my own;
Scarce half I seem to live, dead more then half.
O dark, dark, dark, amid the blaze of noon,                          80
Irrecoverably dark, total Eclipse
Without all hope of day!
O first created Beam, and thou great Word,
Let there be light, and light was over all;
Why am I thus bereav'd thy prime decree?
The Sun to me is dark
And silent as the Moon,
When she deserts the night
Hid in her vacant interlunar cave.
Since light so necessary is to life,                                 90
And almost life itself, if it be true
That light is in the Soul,
She all in every part; why was the sight
To such a tender ball as th' eye confin'd?
So obvious and so easie to be quench't,
And not as feeling through all parts diffus'd,
That she might look at will through every pore?
Then had I not been thus exil'd from light;
As in the land of darkness yet in light,
To live a life half dead, a living death,                           100
And buried; but O yet more miserable!
My self, my Sepulcher, a moving Grave,
Buried, yet not exempt
By priviledge of death and burial
>From worst of other evils, pains and wrongs,
But made hereby obnoxious more
To all the miseries of life,
Life in captivity
Among inhuman foes.
But who are these? for with joint pace I hear                       110
The tread of many feet stearing this way;
Perhaps my enemies who come to stare
At my affliction, and perhaps to insult,
Thir daily practice to afflict me more.

Chor:  This, this is he; softly a while,
Let us not break in upon him;
O change beyond report, thought, or belief!
See how he lies at random, carelessly diffus'd,
With languish't head unpropt,
As one past hope, abandon'd                                         120
And by himself given over;
In slavish habit, ill-fitted weeds
O're worn and soild;
Or do my eyes misrepresent?  Can this be hee,
That Heroic, that Renown'd,
Irresistible Samson? whom unarm'd
No strength of man, or fiercest wild beast could withstand;
Who tore the Lion, as the Lion tears the Kid,
Ran on embattelld Armies clad in Iron,
And weaponless himself,                                             130
Made Arms ridiculous, useless the forgery
Of brazen shield and spear, the hammer'd Cuirass,
Chalybean temper'd steel, and frock of mail
Adamantean Proof;
But safest he who stood aloof,
When insupportably his foot advanc't,
In scorn of thir proud arms and warlike tools,
Spurn'd them to death by Troops.  The bold Ascalonite
Fled from his Lion ramp, old Warriors turn'd
Thir plated backs under his heel;                                   140
Or grovling soild thir crested helmets in the dust.
Then with what trivial weapon came to Hand,
The Jaw of a dead Ass, his sword of bone,
A thousand fore-skins fell, the flower of Palestin
In Ramath-lechi famous to this day:
Then by main force pull'd up, and on his shoulders bore
The Gates of Azza, Post, and massie Bar
Up to the Hill by Hebron, seat of Giants old,
No journey of a Sabbath day, and loaded so;
Like whom the Gentiles feign to bear up Heav'n.                     150
Which shall I first bewail,
Thy Bondage or lost Sight,
Prison within Prison
Inseparably dark?
Thou art become (O worst imprisonment!)
The Dungeon of thy self; thy Soul
 (Which Men enjoying sight oft without cause complain)
Imprison'd now indeed,
In real darkness of the body dwells,
Shut up from outward light                                          160
To incorporate with gloomy night;
For inward light alas
Puts forth no visual beam.
O mirror of our fickle state,
Since man on earth unparallel'd!
The rarer thy example stands,
By how much from the top of wondrous glory,
Strongest of mortal men,
To lowest pitch of abject fortune thou art fall'n.
For him I reckon not in high estate                                 170
Whom long descent of birth
Or the sphear of fortune raises;
But thee whose strength, while vertue was her mate
Might have subdu'd the Earth,
Universally crown'd with highest praises.

Sam:  I hear the sound of words, thir sense the air
Dissolves unjointed e're it reach my ear.

Chor:  Hee speaks, let us draw nigh.  Matchless in might,
The glory late of Israel, now the grief;
We come thy friends and neighbours not unknown                      180
>From Eshtaol and Zora's fruitful Vale
To visit or bewail thee, or if better,
Counsel or Consolation we may bring,
Salve to thy Sores, apt words have power to swage
The tumors of a troubl'd mind,
And are as Balm to fester'd wounds.

Sam:  Your coming, Friends, revives me, for I learn
Now of my own experience, not by talk,
How counterfeit a coin they are who friends
Bear in their Superscription (of the most                           190
I would be understood) in prosperous days
They swarm, but in adverse withdraw their head
Not to be found, though sought.  Wee see, O friends.
How many evils have enclos'd me round;
Yet that which was the worst now least afflicts me,
Blindness, for had I sight, confus'd with shame,
How could I once look up, or heave the head,
Who like a foolish Pilot have shipwrack't,
My Vessel trusted to me from above,
Gloriously rigg'd; and for a word, a tear,                          200
Fool, have divulg'd the secret gift of God
To a deceitful Woman : tell me Friends,
Am I not sung and proverbd for a Fool
In every street, do they not say, how well
Are come upon him his deserts? yet why?
Immeasurable strength they might behold
In me, of wisdom nothing more then mean;
This with the other should, at least, have paird,
These two proportiond ill drove me transverse.

Chor:  Tax not divine disposal, wisest Men                          210
Have err'd, and by bad Women been deceiv'd;
And shall again, pretend they ne're so wise.
Deject not then so overmuch thy self,
Who hast of sorrow thy full load besides;
Yet truth to say, I oft have heard men wonder
Why thou shouldst wed Philistian women rather
Then of thine own Tribe fairer, or as fair,
At least of thy own Nation, and as noble.

Sam:  The first I saw at Timna, and she pleas'd
Mee, not my Parents, that I sought to wed,                          220
The daughter of an Infidel: they knew not
That what I motion'd was of God; I knew
>From intimate impulse, and therefore urg'd
The Marriage on; that by occasion hence
I might begin Israel's Deliverance,
The work to which I was divinely call'd;
She proving false, the next I took to Wife
(O that I never had ! fond wish too late)
Was in the Vale of Sorec, Dalila,
That specious Monster, my accomplisht snare.                        230
I thought it lawful from my former act,
And the same end; still watching to oppress
Israel's oppressours: of what now I suffer
She was not the prime cause, but I my self,
Who vanquisht with a peal of words (O weakness!)
Gave up my fort of silence to a Woman.

Chor:  In seeking just occasion to provoke
The Philistine, thy Countries Enemy,
Thou never wast remiss, I hear thee witness:
Yet Israel still serves with all his Sons.                          240

Sam:  That fault I take not on me, but transfer
On Israel's Governours, and Heads of Tribes,
Who seeing those great acts which God had done
Singly by me against their Conquerours
Acknowledg'd not, or not at all consider'd
Deliverance offerd : I on th' other side
Us'd no ambition to commend my deeds,
The deeds themselves, though mute, spoke loud the dooer;
But they persisted deaf, and would not seem
To count them things worth notice, till at length                   250
Thir Lords the Philistines with gather'd powers
Enterd Judea seeking mee, who then
Safe to the rock of Etham was retir'd,
Not flying, but fore-casting in what place
To set upon them, what advantag'd best;
Mean while the men of Judah to prevent
The harrass of thir Land, beset me round;
I willingly on some conditions came
Into thir hands, and they as gladly yield me
To the uncircumcis'd a welcom prey,                                 260
Bound with two cords; but cords to me were threds
Toucht with the flame: on thir whole Host I flew
Unarm'd, and with a trivial weapon fell'd
Thir choicest youth; they only liv'd who fled.
Had Judah that day join'd, or one whole Tribe,
They had by this possess'd the Towers of Gath,
And lorded over them whom now they serve;
But what more oft in Nations grown corrupt,
And by thir vices brought to servitude,
Then to love Bondage more then Liberty,                             270
Bondage with ease then strenuous liberty;
And to despise, or envy, or suspect
Whom God hath of his special favour rais'd
As thir Deliverer; if he aught begin,
How frequent to desert him, and at last
To heap ingratitude on worthiest deeds?

Chor:  Thy words to my remembrance bring
How Succoth and the Fort of Penuel
Thir great Deliverer contemn'd,
The matchless Gideon in pursuit                                     280
Of Madian and her vanquisht Kings;
And how ingrateful Ephraim
Not worse then by his shield and spear
Had dealt with Jephtha, who by argument,
Defended Israel from the Ammonite,
Had not his prowess quell'd thir pride
In that sore battel when so many dy'd
Without Reprieve adjudg'd to death,
For want of well pronouncing Shibboleth.

Sam:  Of such examples adde mee to the roul,                        290
Mee easily indeed mine may neglect,
But Gods propos'd deliverance not so.

Chor: Just are the ways of God,
And justifiable to Men;
Unless there be who think not God at all,
If any be, they walk obscure;
For of such Doctrine never was there School,
But the heart of the Fool,
And no man therein Doctor but himself.
Yet more there be who doubt his ways not just,                      300
As to his own edicts, found contradicting,
Then give the rains to wandring thought,
Regardless of his glories diminution;
Till by thir own perplexities involv'd
They ravel more, still less resolv'd,
But never find self-satisfying solution.
As if they would confine th' interminable,
And tie him to his own prescript,
Who made our Laws to bind us, not himself,
And hath full right to exempt                                       310
Whom so it pleases him by choice
>From National obstriction, without taint
Of sin, or legal debt;
For with his own Laws he can best dispence.
He would not else who never wanted means,
Nor in respect of the enemy just cause
To set his people free,
Have prompted this Heroic Nazarite,
Against his vow of strictest purity,
To seek in marriage that fallacious Bride,                          320
Unclean, unchaste.
Down Reason then, at least vain reasonings down,
Though Reason here aver
That moral verdit quits her of unclean :
Unchaste was subsequent, her stain not his.
But see here comes thy reverend Sire
With careful step, Locks white as doune,
Old Manoah: advise
Forthwith how thou oughtst to receive him.

Sam:  Ay me, another inward grief awak't,                           330
With mention of that name renews th' assault.

Man:  Brethren and men of Dan, for such ye seem,
Though in this uncouth place; if old respect,
As I suppose, towards your once gloried friend,
My Son now Captive, hither hath inform'd
Your younger feet, while mine cast back with age
Came lagging after; say if he be here.

Chor:  As signal now in low dejected state,
As earst in highest; behold him where be lies.

Man:  O miserable change! is this the man,                          340
That invincible Samson, far renown'd,
The dread of Israel's foes, who with a strength
Equivalent to Angels walk'd thir streets,
None offering fight; who single combatant
Duell'd thir Armies rank't in proud array,
Himself an Army, now unequal match
To save himself against a coward arm'd
At one spears length.  O ever failing trust
In mortal strength! and oh what not in man
Deceivable and vain! Nay what thing good                            350
Pray'd for, but often proves our woe, our bane?
I pray'd for Children, and thought barrenness
In wedlock a reproach; I gain'd a Son,
And such a Son as all Men hail'd me happy;
Who would be now a Father in my stead?
O wherefore did God grant me my request,
And as a blessing with such pomp adorn'd?
Why are his gifts desirable, to tempt
Our earnest Prayers, then giv'n with solemn hand
As Graces, draw a Scorpions tail behind?                            360
For this did the Angel twice descend? for this
Ordain'd thy nurture holy, as of a Plant;
Select, and Sacred, Glorious for a while,
The miracle of men: then in an hour
Ensnar'd, assaulted, overcome, led bound,
Thy Foes derision, Captive, Poor, and Blind
Into a Dungeon thrust, to work with Slaves?
Alas methinks whom God hath chosen once
To worthiest deeds, if he through frailty err,
He should not so o'rewhelm, and as a thrall                         370
Subject him to so foul indignities,
Be it but for honours sake of former deeds.

Sam:  Appoint not heavenly disposition, Father,
Nothing of all these evils hath befall'n me
But justly; I my self have brought them on,
Sole Author I, sole cause: if aught seem vile,
As vile hath been my folly, who have profan'd
The mystery of God giv'n me under pledge
Of vow, and have betray'd it to a woman,
A Canaanite, my faithless enemy.                                    380
This well I knew, nor was at all surpris'd,
But warn'd by oft experience: did not she
Of Timna first betray me, and reveal
The secret wrested from me in her highth
Of Nuptial Love profest, carrying it strait
To them who had corrupted her, my Spies,
And Rivals? In this other was there found
More Faith? who also in her prime of love,
Spousal embraces, vitiated with Gold,
Though offer'd only, by the sent conceiv'd                          390
Her spurious first-born; Treason against me?
Thrice she assay'd with flattering prayers and sighs,
And amorous reproaches to win from me
My capital secret, in what part my strength
Lay stor'd in what part summ'd, that she might know:
Thrice I deluded her, and turn'd to sport
Her importunity, each time perceiving
How openly, and with what impudence
She purpos'd to betray me, and (which was worse
Then undissembl'd hate) with what contempt                          400
She sought to make me Traytor to my self;
Yet the fourth time, when mustring all her wiles,
With blandisht parlies, feminine assaults,
Tongue-batteries, she surceas'd not day nor night
To storm me over-watch't, and wearied out.
At times when men seek most repose and rest,
I yielded, and unlock'd her all my heart,
Who with a grain of manhood well resolv'd
Might easily have shook off all her snares :
But foul effeminacy held me yok't                                   410
Her Bond-slave; O indignity, O blot
To Honour and Religion! servil mind
Rewarded well with servil punishment!
The base degree to which I now am fall'n,
These rags, this grinding, is not yet so base
As was my former servitude, ignoble,
Unmanly, ignominious, infamous,
True slavery, and that blindness worse then this,
That saw not how degeneratly I serv'd.

Man:  I cannot praise thy Marriage choises, Son,                    420
Rather approv'd them not; but thou didst plead
Divine impulsion prompting how thou might'st
Find some occasion to infest our Foes.
I state not that; this I am sure; our Foes
Found soon occasion thereby to make thee
Thir Captive, and thir triumph; thou the sooner
Temptation found'st, or over-potent charms
To violate the sacred trust of silence
Deposited within thee; which to have kept
Tacit, was in thy power; true; and thou hear'st                     430
Enough, and more the burden of that fault;
Bitterly hast thou paid, and still art paying
That rigid score.  A worse thing yet remains,
This day the Philistines a popular Feast
Here celebrate in Gaza, and proclaim
Great Pomp, and Sacrifice, and Praises loud
To Dagon, as their God who hath deliver'd
Thee Samson bound and blind into thir hands,
Them out of thine, who slew'st them many a slain.
So Dagon shall be magnifi'd, and God,                               440
Besides whom is no God, compar'd with Idols,
Disglorifi'd, blasphem'd, and had in scorn
By th' Idolatrous rout amidst thir wine;
Which to have come to pass by means of thee,
Samson, of all thy sufferings think the heaviest,
Of all reproach the most with shame that ever
Could have befall'n thee and thy Fathers house.

Sam:  Father, I do acknowledge and confess
That I this honour, I this pomp have brought
To Dagon, and advanc'd his praises high                             450
Among the Heathen round; to God have brought
Dishonour, obloquie, and op't the mouths
Of Idolists, and Atheists; have brought scandal
To Israel diffidence of God, and doubt
In feeble hearts, propense anough before
To waver, or fall off and joyn with Idols:
Which is my chief affliction, shame and sorrow,
The anguish of my Soul, that suffers not
Mine eie to harbour sleep, or thoughts to rest.
This only hope relieves me, that the strife                         460
With me hath end; all the contest is now
'Twixt God and Dagon; Dagon hath presum'd,
Me overthrown, to enter lists with God,
His Deity comparing and preferring
Before the God of Abraham. He, he sure,
Will not connive, or linger, thus provok'd,
But will arise and his great name assert:
Dagon must stoop, and shall e're long receive
Such a discomfit, as shall quite despoil him
Of all these boasted Trophies won on me,                            470
And with confusion blank his Worshippers.

Man: With cause this hope relieves thee, and these words
I as a Prophecy receive: for God,
Nothing more certain, will not long defer
To vindicate the glory of his name
Against all competition, nor will long
Endure it, doubtful whether God be Lord,
Or Dagon.  But for thee what shall be done?
Thou must not in the mean while here forgot
Lie in this miserable loathsom plight                               480
Neglected.  I already have made way
To some Philistian Lords, with whom to treat
About thy ransom: well they may by this
Have satisfi'd thir utmost of revenge
By pains and slaveries, worse then death inflicted
On thee, who now no more canst do them harm.

Sam:  Spare that proposal, Father, spare the trouble
Of that sollicitation; let me here,
As I deserve, pay on my punishment;
And expiate, if possible, my crime,                                 490
Shameful garrulity.  To have reveal'd
Secrets of men, the secrets of a friend,
How hainous had the fact been, how deserving
Contempt, and scorn of all, to be excluded
All friendship, and avoided as a blab,
The mark of fool set on his front?
But I Gods counsel have not kept, his holy  secret
Presumptuously have publish'd, impiously,
Weakly at least, and shamefully: A sin
That Gentiles in thir Parables condemn                              500
To thir abyss and horrid pains confin'd.

Man:  Be penitent and for thy fault contrite,
But act not in thy own affliction, Son,
Repent the sin, but if the punishment
Thou canst avoid, selfpreservation bids;
Or th' execution leave to high disposal,
And let another hand, not thine, exact
Thy penal forfeit from thy self; perhaps
God will relent, and quit thee all his debt;
Who evermore approves and more accepts                              510
(Best pleas'd with humble and filial submission)
Him who imploring mercy sues for life,
Then who selfrigorous chooses death as due;
Which argues overjust, and self-displeas'd
For self-offence, more then for God offended.
Reject not then what offerd means, who knows
But God hath set before us, to return thee
Home to thy countrey and his sacred house,
Where thou mayst bring thy off'rings, to avert
His further ire, with praiers and vows renew'd.                     520

Sam:  His pardon I implore; but as for life,
To what end should I seek it? when in strength
All mortals I excell'd, and great in hopes
With youthful courage and magnanimous thoughts
Of birth from  Heav'n foretold and high exploits,
Full of divine instinct, after some proof
Of acts indeed heroic, far beyond
The Sons of Anac, famous now and blaz'd,
Fearless of danger, like a petty God
I walk'd about admir'd of all and dreaded                           530
On hostile ground, none daring my affront.
Then swoll'n with pride into the snare I fell
Of fair fallacious looks, venereal trains,
Softn'd with pleasure and voluptuous life;
At length to lay my head and hallow'd pledge
Of all my strength in the lascivious lap
Of a deceitful Concubine who shore me
Like a tame Weather, all my precious fleece,
Then turn'd me out ridiculous, despoil'd,
Shav'n, and disarm'd among my enemies.                              540

Chor.  Desire of wine and all delicious drinks,
Which many a famous Warriour overturns,
Thou couldst repress, nor did the dancing Rubie
Sparkling; out-pow'rd, the flavor, or the smell,
Or taste that cheers the heart of Gods and men,
Allure thee from the cool Crystalline stream.

Sam. Where ever fountain or fresh current flow'd
Against the Eastern ray, translucent, pure,
With touch aetherial of Heav'ns fiery rod
I drank, from the clear milkie juice allaying                       550
Thirst, and refresht; nor envy'd them the grape
Whose heads that turbulent liquor fills with fumes.

Chor.  O madness, to think use of strongest wines
And strongest drinks our chief support of health,
When God with these forbid'n made choice to rear
His mighty Champion, strong above compare,
Whose drink was only from the liquid brook.

 Sam.  But what avail'd this temperance, not compleat
Against another object more enticing?
What boots it at one gate to make defence,                          560
And at another to let in the foe
Effeminatly vanquish't? by which means,
Now blind, disheartn'd, sham'd, dishonour'd, quell'd,
To what can I be useful, wherein serve
My Nation, and the work from Heav'n impos'd,
But to sit idle on the houshold hearth,
A burdenous drone; to visitants a gaze,
Or pitied object, these redundant locks
Robustious to no purpose clustring down,
Vain monument of strength; till length of years                     570
And sedentary numness craze my limbs
To a contemptible old age obscure.
Here rather let me drudge and earn my bread,
Till vermin or the draff of servil food
Consume me, and oft-invocated death
Hast'n the welcom end of all my pains.

Man.  Wilt thou then serve the Philistines with that gift
Which was expresly giv'n thee to annoy them?
Better at home lie bed-rid, not only idle,
Inglorious, unimploy'd, with age out-worn.                          580
But God who caus'd a fountain at thy prayer
>From the dry ground to spring, thy thirst to allay
After the brunt of battel, can as easie
Cause light again within thy eies to spring,
Wherewith to serve him better then thou hast;
And I perswade me so; why else this strength
Miraculous yet remaining in those locks?
His might continues in thee not for naught,
Nor shall his wondrous gifts be frustrate thus.

Sam:  All otherwise to me my thoughts portend,                      590
That these dark orbs no more shall treat with light,
Nor th' other light of life continue long,
But yield to double darkness nigh at hand:
So much I feel my genial spirits droop,
My hopes all flat, nature within me seems
In all her functions weary of herself;
My race of glory run, and race of shame,
And I shall shortly be with them that rest.

Man.  Believe not these suggestions which proceed
>From anguish of the mind and humours black,                         600
That mingle with thy fancy.  I however
Must not omit a Fathers timely care
To prosecute the means of thy deliverance
By ransom or how else: mean while be calm,
And healing words from these thy friends admit.

Sam.  O that torment should not be confin'd
To the bodies wounds and sores
With maladies innumerable
In heart, head, brest, and reins;
But must secret passage find                                        610
To th' inmost mind,
There exercise all his fierce accidents,
And on her purest spirits prey,
As on entrails, joints, and limbs,
With answerable pains, but more intense,
'Though void of corporal sense.
My griefs not only pain me
As a lingring disease,
But finding no redress, ferment and rage,
Nor less then wounds immedicable                                    620
Ranckle, and fester, and gangrene,
To black mortification.
Thoughts my Tormenters arm'd with deadly stings
Mangle my apprehensive tenderest parts,
Exasperate, exulcerate, and raise
Dire inflammation which no cooling herb
Or rnedcinal liquor can asswage,
Nor breath of Vernal Air from snowy Alp.
Sleep hath forsook and giv'n me o're
To deaths benumming Opium as my only cure.                          630
Thence faintings, swounings of despair,
And sense of Heav'ns desertion.
I was his nursling once and choice delight,
His destin'd from the womb,
Promisd by Heavenly message twice descending.
Under his special eie
Abstemious I grew up and thriv'd amain;
He led me on to mightiest deeds
Above the nerve of mortal arm
Against the uncircumcis'd, our enemies.                             640
But now hath cast me off as never known,
And to those cruel enemies,
Whom I by his appointment had provok't,
Left me all helpless with th' irreparable loss
Of sight, reserv'd alive to be repeated
The subject of thir cruelty, or scorn.
Nor am I in the list of them that hope;
Hopeless are all my evils, all remediless;
This one prayer yet remains, might I be heard,
No long petition, speedy death,                                     650
The close of all my miseries, and the balm.

Chor:  Many are the sayings of the wise
In antient and in modern books enroll'd;
Extolling Patience as the truest fortitude;
And to the bearing well of all calamities,
All chances incident to mans frail life
Consolatories writ
With studied argument, and much perswasion sought
Lenient of grief and anxious thought,
But with th' afflicted in his pangs thir sound                      680
Little prevails, or rather seems a tune,
Harsh, and of dissonant mood from his complaint,
Unless he feel within
Some sourse of consolation from above;
Secret refreshings, that repair his strength,
And fainting spirits uphold.
God of our Fathers, what is man!
That thou towards him with hand so various,
Or might I say contrarious,
Temperst thy providence through his short course,                   670
Not evenly, as thou rul'st
The Angelic orders and inferiour creatures mute,
Irrational and brute.
Nor do I name of men the common rout,
That wandring loose about
Grow up and perish, as the summer flie,
Heads without name no more rememberd,
But such as thou hast solemnly elected,
With gifts and graces eminently adorn'd
To some great work, thy glory,                                      680
And peoples safety, which in part they effect:
Yet toward these thus dignifi'd, thou oft
Amidst thir highth of noon,
Changest thy countenance, and thy hand with no regard
Of highest favours past
>From thee on them, or them to thee of service.
Nor only dost degrade them, or remit
To life obscur'd, which were a fair dismission,
But throw'st them lower then thou didst exalt them high,
Unseemly falls in human eie,                                        690
Too grievous for the trespass or omission,
Oft leav'st them to the hostile sword
Of Heathen and prophane, thir carkasses
To dogs and fowls a prey, or else captiv'd:
Or to the unjust tribunals, under change of times,
And condemnation of the ingrateful multitude.
If these they scape, perhaps in poverty
With sickness and disease thou bow'st them down,
Painful diseases and deform'd,                                      700
In crude old age;
Though not disordinate, yet causless suffring
The punishment of dissolute days, in fine,
Just or unjust, alike seem miserable,
For oft alike, both come to evil end.
So deal not with this once thy glorious Champion,
The Image of thy strength, and mighty minister.
What do I beg? how hast thou dealt already?
Behold him in this state calamitous, and turn
His labours, for thou canst, to peaceful end.
But who is this, what thing of Sea or Land?                         710
Femal of sex it seems,
That so bedeckt, ornate, and gay,
Comes this way sailing
Like a stately Ship
Of Tarsus, bound for th' Isles
Of Javan or Gadier
With all her bravery on, and tackle trim,
Sails fill'd, and streamers waving,
Courted by all the winds that hold them play,
An Amber sent of odorous perfume                                    720
Her harbinger, a damsel train behind;
Some rich Philistian Matron she may seem,
And now at nearer view, no other certain
Than Dalila thy wife.

Sam:  My Wife, my Traytress, let her not come near me.

Cho:  Yet on she moves, now stands & eies thee fixt,
About t'have spoke, but now, with head declin'd
Like a fair flower surcharg'd with dew, she weeps
And words addrest seem into tears dissolv'd,
Wetting the borders of her silk'n veil:                             730
But now again she makes address to speak.

Dal:  With doubtful feet and wavering resolution
I came, still dreading thy displeasure, Samson,
Which to have merited, without excuse,
I cannot but acknowledge; yet if tears
May expiate (though the fact more evil drew
In the perverse event then I foresaw)
My penance hath not slack'n'd, though my pardon
No way assur'd.  But conjugal affection
Prevailing over fear, and timerous doubt                            740
Hath led me on desirous to behold
Once more thy face, and know of thy estate.
If aught in my ability may serve
To light'n what thou suffer'st, and appease
Thy mind with what amends is in my power,
Though late, yet in some part to recompense
My rash but more unfortunate misdeed.

Sam:  Out, out Hyaena; these are thy wonted arts,
And arts of every woman false like thee,
To break all faith, all vows, deceive, betray,                      750
Then as repentant to submit, beseech,
And reconcilement move with feign'd remorse,
Confess, and promise wonders in her change,
Not truly penitent, but chief to try
Her husband, how far urg'd his patience bears,
His vertue or weakness which way to assail:
Then with more cautious and instructed skill
Again transgresses, and again submits;
That wisest and best men full oft beguil'd
With goodness principl'd not to reject                              760
The penitent, but ever to forgive,
Are drawn to wear out miserable days,
Entangl'd with a poysnous bosom snake,
If not by quick destruction soon cut off
As I by thee, to Ages an example.

Dal: Yet hear me Samson; not that I endeavour
To lessen or extenuate my offence,
But that on th' other side if it be weigh'd
By it self, with aggravations not surcharg'd,
Or else with just allowance counterpois'd                           770
I may, if possible, thy pardon find
The easier towards me, or thy hatred less.
First granting, as I do, it was a weakness
In me, but incident to all our sex,
Curiosity, inquisitive, importune
Of secrets, then with like infirmity
To publish them, both common female faults:
Was it not weakness also to make known
For importunity, that is for naught,
Wherein consisted all thy strength and safety?                      780
To what I did thou shewdst me first the way.
But I to enemies reveal'd, and should not.
Nor shouldst thou have trusted that to womans frailty
E're I to thee, thou to thy self wast cruel.
Let weakness then with weakness come to parl
So near related, or the same of kind,
Thine forgive mine; that men may censure thine
The gentler, if severely thou exact not
More strength from me, then in thy self was found.
And what if Love, which thou interpret'st hate,                     790
The jealousie of Love, powerful of sway
In human hearts, nor less in mine towards thee,
Caus'd what I did? I saw thee mutable
Of fancy, feard lest one day thou wouldst leave me
As her at Timna, sought by all means therefore
How to endear, and hold thee to me firmest:
No better way I saw then by importuning
To learn thy secrets, get into my power
Thy key of strength and safety: thou wilt say,
Why then reveal'd? I was assur'd by those                           800
Who tempted me, that nothing was design'd
Against thee but safe custody, and hold:
That made for me, I knew that liberty
Would draw thee forth to perilous enterprises,
While I at home sate full of cares and fears
Wailing thy absence in my widow'd bed;
Here I should still enjoy thee day and night
Mine and Loves prisoner, not the Philistines,
Whole to my self, unhazarded abroad,
Fearless at home of partners in my love.                            810
These reasons in Loves law have past for good,
Though fond and reasonless to some perhaps:
And Love hath oft, well meaning, wrought much wo,
Yet always pity or pardon hath obtain'd.
Be not unlike all others, not austere
As thou art strong, inflexible as steel.
If thou in strength all mortals dost exceed,
In uncompassionate anger do not so.

Sam:  How cunningly the sorceress displays
Her own transgressions, to upbraid me mine!                         820
That malice not repentance brought thee hither,
By this appears : I gave, thou say'st, th' example,
I led the way; bitter reproach, but true,
I to my self was false e're thou to me,
Such pardon therefore as I give my folly,
Take to thy wicked deed: which when thou seest
Impartial, self-severe, inexorable,
Thou wilt renounce thy seeking, and much rather
Confess it feign'd, weakness is thy excuse,
And I believe it, weakness to resist                                830
Philistian gold: if weakness may excuse,
What Murtherer, what Traytor, Parricide,
Incestuous, Sacrilegious, but may plead it?
All wickedness is weakness : that plea therefore
With God or Man will gain thee no remission.
But Love constrain'd thee; call it furious rage
To satisfie thy lust: Love seeks to have Love;
My love how couldst thou hope, who tookst the way
To raise in me inexpiable hate,
Knowing, as needs I must, by thee betray'd ?                        840
In vain thou striv'st to cover shame with shame,
Or by evasions thy crime uncoverst more.

Dal:  Since thou determinst weakness for no plea
In man or woman, though to thy own condemning,
Hear what assaults I had, what snares besides,
What sieges girt me round, e're I consented;
Which might have aw'd the best resolv'd of men,
The constantest to have yielded without blame.
It was not gold, as to my charge thou lay'st,
That wrought with me: thou know'st the Magistrates                  850
And Princes of my countrey came in person,
Sollicited, commanded, threatn'd, urg'd,
Adjur'd by all the bonds of civil Duty
And of Religion, press'd how just it was,
How honourable, how glorious to entrap
A common enemy, who had destroy'd
Such numbers of our Nation : and the Priest
Was not behind, but ever at my ear,
Preaching how meritorious with the gods
It would be to ensnare an irreligious                               860
Dishonourer of Dagon : what had I
To oppose against such powerful arguments?
Only my love of thee held long debate;
And combated in silence all these reasons
With hard contest: at length that grounded maxim
So rife and celebrated in the mouths
Of wisest men; that to the public good
Private respects must yield; with grave authority'
Took full possession of me and prevail'd;
Vertue, as I thought, truth, duty so enjoyning.                     870

Sam:  I thought where all thy circling wiles would end;
In feign'd Religion, smooth hypocrisie.
But had thy love, still odiously pretended,
Bin, as it ought, sincere, it would have taught thee
Far other reasonings, brought forth other deeds.
I before all the daughters of my Tribe
And of my Nation chose thee from among
My enemies, lov'd thee, as too well thou knew'st,
Too well, unbosom'd all my secrets to thee,
Not out of levity, but over-powr'd                                  880
By thy request, who could deny thee nothing;
Yet now am judg'd an enemy.  Why then
Didst thou at first receive me for thy husband?
Then, as since then, thy countries foe profest:
Being once a wife, for me thou wast to leave
Parents and countrey; nor was I their subject,
Nor under their protection but my own,
Thou mine, not theirs: if aught against my life
Thy countrey sought of thee, it sought unjustly,
Against the law of nature, law of nations,                          890
No more thy countrey, but an impious crew
Of men conspiring to uphold thir state
By worse than hostile deeds, violating the ends
For which our countrey is a name so dear;
Not therefore to be obey'd.  But zeal mov'd thee;
To please thy gods thou didst it; gods unable
To acquit themselves and prosecute their foes
But by ungodly deeds, the contradiction
Of their own deity, Gods cannot be:
Less therefore to be pleas'd, obey'd, or fear'd,                    900
These false pretexts and varnish'd colours failing,
Bare in thy guilt how foul must thou appear?

Dal:  In argument with men a woman ever
Goes by the worse, whatever be her cause.

Sam:  For want of words no doubt, or lack of breath,
Witness when I was worried with thy peals.

Dal:  I was a fool, too rash, and quite mistaken
In what I thought would have succeeded best.
Let me obtain forgiveness of thee, Samson,
Afford me place to shew what recompence                             910
Towards thee I intend for what I have misdone,
Misguided: only what remains past cure
Bear not too sensibly, nor still insist
To afflict thy self in vain: though sight be lost,
Life yet hath many solaces, enjoy'd
Where other senses want not their delights
At home in leisure and domestic ease,
Exempt from many a care and chance to which
Eye-sight exposes daily men abroad.
I to the Lords will intercede, not doubting                         920
Thir favourable ear, that I may fetch thee
>From forth this loathsom prison-house, to abide
With me, where my redoubl'd love and care
With nursing diligence, to me glad office,
May ever tend about thee to old age
With all things grateful chear'd, and so suppli'd,
That what by me thou hast lost thou least shalt miss.

Sam:  No, no, of my condition take no care;
It fits not; thou and I long since are twain;
Nor think me so unwary or accurst                                   930
To bring my feet again into the snare
Where once I have been caught; I know thy trains
Though dearly to my cost, thy ginns, and toyls;
Thy fair enchanted cup, and warbling charms
No more on me have power, their force is null'd,
So much of Adders wisdom I have learn't
To fence my ear against thy sorceries.
If in my flower of youth and strength, when all men
Lov'd, honour'd, fear'd me, thou alone could hate me
Thy Husband, slight me, sell me, and forgo me;                      940
How wouldst thou use me now, blind, and thereby
Deceiveable, in most things as a child
Helpless, thence easily contemn'd, and scorn'd,
And last neglected? How wouldst thou insult
When I must live uxorious to thy will
In perfet thraldom, how again betray me,
Bearing my words and doings to the Lords
To gloss upon, and censuring, frown or smile?
This Gaol I count the house of Liberty
To thine whose doors my feet shall never enter.                     950

Dal:  Let me approach at least, and touch thy hand.

Sam:  Not for thy life, lest fierce remembrance wake
My sudden rage to tear thee joint by joint.
At distance I forgive thee, go with that;
Bewail thy falshood, and the pious works
It hath brought forth to make thee memorable
Among illustrious women, faithful wives:
Cherish thy hast'n'd widowhood with the gold
Of Matrimonial treason: so farewel.

Dal:  I see thou art implacable, more deaf                          960
To prayers, then winds and seas, yet winds to seas
Are reconcil'd at length, and Sea to Shore:
Thy anger, unappeasable, still rages,
Eternal tempest never to be calm'd.
Why do I humble thus my self, and suing
For peace, reap nothing but repulse and hate?
Bid go with evil omen and the brand
Of infamy upon my name denounc't?
To mix with thy concernments I desist
Henceforth, nor too much disapprove my own.                         970
Fame if not double-fac't is double-mouth'd,
And with contrary blast proclaims most deeds,
On both his wings, one black, th' other white,
Bears greatest names in his wild aerie flight.
My name perhaps among the Circumcis'd
In Dan, in Judah, and the bordering Tribes,
To all posterity may stand defam'd,
With malediction mention'd, and the blot
Of falshood most unconjugal traduc't.
But in my countrey where I most desire,                             980
In Ecron, Gaza, Asdod, and in Gath
I shall be nam'd among the famousest
Of Women, sung at solemn festivals,
Living and dead recorded, who to save
Her countrey from a fierce destroyer, chose
Above the faith of wedlock-bands, my tomb
With odours visited and annual flowers.
Not less renown'd then in Mount Ephraim,
Jael who with inhospitable guile
Smote Sisera sleeping through the Temples nail'd.                   990
Nor shall I count it hainous to enjoy
The public marks of honour and reward
Conferr'd upon me, for the piety
Which to my countrey I was judg'd to have shewn.
At this who ever envies or repines
I leave him to his lot, and like my own.

Chor:  She's gone, a manifest Serpent by her sting
Discover'd in the end, till now conceal'd.

Sam:  So let her go, God sent her to debase me,
And aggravate my folly who committed                               1000
To such a viper his most sacred trust
Of secresie, my safety, and my life.

Chor:  Yet beauty, though injurious, hath strange power,
After offence returning, to regain
Love once possest, nor can be easily
Repuls't, without much inward passion felt
And secret sting of amorous remorse.

Sam:  Love-quarrels oft in pleasing concord end,
Not wedlock-trechery endangering life.

Chor:  It is not vertue, wisdom, valour, wit,                      1010
Strength, comliness of shape, or amplest merit
That womans love can win or long inherit;
But what it is, hard is to say,
Harder to hit,
(Which way soever men refer it)
Much like thy riddle, Samson, in one day
Or seven, though one should musing sit;
If any of these or all, the Timnian bride
Had not so soon preferr'd
Thy Paranymph, worthless to thee compar'd,                         1020
Successour in thy bed,
Nor both so loosly disally'd
Thir nuptials, nor this last so trecherously
Had shorn the fatal harvest of thy head.
Is it for that such outward ornament
Was lavish't on thir Sex, that inward gifts
Were left for hast unfinish't, judgment scant,
Capacity not rais'd to apprehend
Or value what is best
In choice, but oftest to affect the wrong?                         1030
Or was too much of self-love mixt,
Of constancy no root infixt,
That either they love nothing, or not long?
What e're it be, to wisest men and best
Seeming at first all heavenly under virgin veil,
Soft, modest, meek, demure,
Once join'd, the contrary she proves, a thorn
Intestin, far within defensive arms
A cleaving mischief, in his way to vertue
Adverse and turbulent, or by her charms                            1040
Draws him awry enslav'd
With dotage, and his sense deprav'd
To folly and shameful deeds which ruin ends.
What Pilot so expert but needs must wreck
Embarqu'd with such a Stears-mate at the Helm?
Favour'd of Heav'n who finds
One vertuous rarely found,
That in domestic good combines:
Happy that house! his way to peace is smooth:
But vertue which breaks through all opposition,                    1050
And all temptation can remove,
Most shines and most is acceptable above.
Therefore Gods universal Law
Gave to the man despotic power
Over his female in due awe,
Nor from that right to part an hour,
Smile she or lowre:
So shall he least confusion draw
On his whole life, not sway'd
By female usurpation, nor dismay'd.                                1060
But had we best retire, I see a storm?

Sam:  Fair days have oft contracted wind and rain.

Chor:  But this another kind of tempest brings.

Sam:  Be less abstruse, my riddling days are past.

Chor:  Look now for no inchanting voice, nor fear
The bait of honied words; a rougher tongue
Draws hitherward, I know him by his stride,
The Giant Harapha of Gath, his look
Haughty as is his pile high-built and proud.
Comes he in peace? what wind hath blown him hither                 1070
I less conjecture then when first I saw
The sumptuous Dalila floating this way:
His habit carries peace, his brow defiance.

Sam:  Or peace or not, alike to me he comes.

Chor:  His fraught we soon shall know, he now arrives.

Har:  I come not Samson, to condole thy chance,
As these perhaps, yet wish it had not been,
Though for no friendly intent.  I am of Gath,
Men call me Harapha, of stock renown'd
As Og or Anak and the Emims old                                    1080
That Kiriathaim held, thou knowst me now
If thou at all art known.  Much I have heard
Of thy prodigious might and feats perform'd
Incredible to me, in this displeas'd,
That I was never present on the place
Of those encounters, where we might have tri'd
Each others force in camp or listed field:
And now am come to see of whom such noise
Hath walk'd about, and each limb to survey,
If thy appearance answer loud report.                              1090

Sam:  The way to know were not to see but taste.

Har:  Dost thou already single me; I thought
Gives and the Mill had tam'd thee? O that fortune
Had brought me to the field where thou art fam'd
To have wrought such wonders with an Asses Jaw;
I should have forc'd thee soon with other arms,
Or left thy carkass where the Ass lay thrown:
So had the glory of Prowess been recover'd
To Palestine, won by a Philistine
>From the unforeskinn'd race, of whom thou hear'st                  1100
The highest name for valiant Acts, that honour
Certain to have won by mortal duel from thee,
I lose, prevented by thy eyes put out.

Sam:  Boast not of what thou wouldst have done, but do
What then thou would'st, thou seest it in thy hand.

Har:  To combat with a blind man I disdain
And thou hast need much washing to be toucht.

Sam:  Such usage as your honourable Lords
Afford me assassinated and betray'd,
Who durst not with thir whole united powers                        1110
In fight withstand me single and unarm'd,
Nor in the house with chamber Ambushes
Close-banded durst attaque me, no not sleeping,
Till they had hir'd a woman with their gold
Breaking her Marriage Faith to circumvent me.
Therefore without feign'd shifts let be assign'd
Some narrow place enclos'd, where sight may give thee.
Or rather flight, no great advantage on me;
Then put on all thy gorgeous arms, thy Helmet
And Brigandine of brass, thy broad Habergeon.                      1120
Vant-brass and Greves, and Gauntlet, add thy Spear
A Weavers beam, and seven-times-folded shield.
I only with an Oak'n staff will meet thee,
And raise such out-cries on thy clatter'd Iron,
Which long shall not with-hold mee from thy head,
That in a little time while breath remains thee,
Thou oft shalt wish thy self at Gath to boast
Again in safety what thou wouldst have done
To Samson, but shalt never see Gath more.

Har: Thou durst not thus disparage glorious arms                   1130
Which greatest Heroes have in battel worn,
Thir ornament and safety, had not spells
And black enchantments, some Magicians Art
Arm'd thee or charm'd thee strong, which thou from Heaven
Feigndst at thy birth was giv'n thee in thy hair,
Where strength can least abide, though all thy hairs
Were bristles rang'd like those that ridge the back
Of chaf't wild Boars, or ruffl'd Porcupines.

Sam:  I know no Spells, use no forbidden Arts;
My trust is in the living God who gave me                          1140
At my Nativity this strength, diffus'd
No less through all my sinews, joints and bones,
Then thine, while I preserv'd these locks unshorn,
The pledge of my unviolated vow.
For proof hereof, if Dagon be thy god,
Go to his Temple, invocate his aid
With solemnest devotion, spread before him
How highly it concerns his glory now
To frustrate and dissolve these Magic spells,
Which I to be the power of Israel's God                            1150
Avow, and challenge Dagon to the test,
Offering to combat thee his Champion bold,
With th' utmost of his Godhead seconded:
Then thou shalt see, or rather to thy sorrow
Soon feel, whose God is strongest, thine or mine.

Har:  Presume not on thy God, what e're he be,
Thee he regards not, owns not, hath cut off
Quite from his people, and delivered up
Into thy Enemies hand, permitted them
To put out both thine eyes, and fetter'd send thee                 1160
Into the common Prison, there to grind
Among the Slaves and Asses thy comrades,
As good for nothing else, no better service
With those, thy boyst'rous locks, no worthy match
For valour to assail, nor by the sword
Of noble Warriour, so to stain his honour,
But by the Barbers razor best subdu'd.

Sam:  All these indignities, for such they are
>From thine, these evils I deserve and more,
Acknowledge them from God inflicted on me                          1170
Justly, yet despair not of his final pardon
Whose ear is ever open; and his eye
Gracious to re-admit the suppliant;
In confidence whereof I once again
Defie thee to the trial of mortal fight,
By combat to decide whose god is God,
Thine or whom I with Israel's Sons adore.

Har:  Fair honour that thou dost thy God, in trusting
He will accept thee to defend his cause,
A Murtherer, a Revolter, and a Robber.                             1180

Sam: Tongue-doubtie Giant, how dost thou prove me these?

Har:  Is not thy Nation subject to our Lords?
Thir Magistrates confest it, when they took thee
As a League-breaker and deliver'd bound
Into our hands: for hadst thou not committed
Notorious murder on those thirty men
At Askalon, who never did thee harm,
Then like a Robber stripdst them of thir robes?
The Philistines, when thou hadst broke the league,
Went up with armed powers thee only seeking,                       1190
To others did no violence nor spoil.

Sam:  Among the Daughters of the Philistines
I chose a Wife, which argu'd me no foe;
And in your City held my Nuptial Feast:
But your ill-meaning Politician Lords,
Under pretence of Bridal friends and guests,
Appointed to await me thirty spies,
Who threatning cruel death constrain'd the bride
To wring from me and tell to them my secret,
That solv'd the riddle which I had propos'd.                       1200
When I perceiv'd all set on enmity,
As on my enemies, where ever chanc'd,
I us'd hostility, and took thir spoil
To pay my underminers in thir coin.
My Nation was subjected to your Lords.
It was the force of Conquest; force with force
Is well ejected when the Conquer'd can.
But I a private person, whom my Countrey
As a league-breaker gave up bound, presum'd
Single Rebellion and did Hostile Acts.                             1210
I was no private but a person rais'd
With strength sufficient and command from Heav'n
To free my Countrey; if their servile minds
Me their Deliverer sent would not receive,
But to thir Masters gave me up for nought,
Th' unworthier they; whence to this day they serve.
I was to do my part from Heav'n assign'd,
And had perform'd it if my known offence
Had not disabl'd me, not all your force:
These shifts refuted, answer thy appellant                         1220
Though by his blindness maim'd for high attempts,
Who now defies thee thrice to single fight,
As a petty enterprise of small enforce.

Har:  With thee a Man condemn'd, a Slave enrol'd,
Due by the Law to capital punishment?
To fight with thee no man of arms will deign.

Sam:  Cam'st thou for this, vain boaster, to survey me,
To descant on my strength, and give thy verdit?
Come nearer, part not hence so slight inform'd;
But take good heed my hand survey not thee.                        1230
Har:  O Baal-zebub! can my ears unus'd
Hear these dishonours, and not render death?

Sam:  No man with-holds thee, nothing from thy hand
Fear I incurable; bring up thy van,
My heels are fetter'd, but my fist is free.

Har:  This insolence other kind of answer fits.

Sam:  Go baffl'd coward, lest I run upon thee,
Though in these chains, bulk without spirit vast,
And with one buffet lay thy structure low,
Or swing thee in the Air, then dash thee down                      1240
To the hazard of thy brains and shatter'd sides.

Har:  By Astaroth e're long thou shalt lament
These braveries in Irons loaden on thee.

Chor:  His Giantship is gone somewhat crestfall'n,
Stalking with less unconsci'nable strides,
And lower looks, but in a sultrie chafe.

Sam: I dread him not, nor all his Giant-brood,
Though Fame divulge him Father of five Sons
All of Gigantic size, Goliah chief.

Chor:  He will directly to the Lords, I fear,                      1250
And with malitious counsel stir them up
Some way or other yet further to afflict thee.

Sam:  He must allege some cause, and offer'd fight
Will not dare mention, lest a question rise
Whether he durst accept the offer or not,
And that he durst not plain enough appear'd.
Much more affliction then already felt
They cannot well impose, nor I sustain;
If they intend advantage of my labours
The work of many hands, which earns my keeping                     1260
With no small profit daily to my owners.
But come what will, my deadliest foe will prove
My speediest friend, by death to rid me hence,
The worst that he can give, to me the best.
Yet so it may fall out, because thir end
Is hate, not help to me, it may with mine
Draw thir own ruin who attempt the deed.

Chor:  Oh how comely it is and how reviving
To the Spirits of just men long opprest!
When God into the hands of thir deliverer                          1270
Puts invincible might
To quell the mighty of the Earth, th' oppressour,
The brute and boist'rous force of violent men
Hardy and industrious to support
Tyrannic power, but raging to pursue
The righteous and all such as honour Truth;
He all thir Ammunition
And feats of War defeats
With plain Heroic magnitude of mind
And celestial vigour arm'd,                                        1270
Thir Armories and Magazins contemns,
Renders them useless, while
With winged expedition
Swift as the lightning glance he executes
His errand on the wicked, who surpris'd
Lose thir defence distracted and amaz'd.
But patience is more oft the exercise
Of Saints, the trial of thir fortitude,
Making them each his own Deliverer,
And Victor over all                                                1290
That tyrannie or fortune can inflict,
Either of these is in thy lot,
Samson, with might endu'd
Above the Sons of men; but sight bereav'd
May chance to number thee with those
Whom Patience finally must crown.
This Idols day hath bin to thee no day of rest,
Labouring thy mind
More then the working day thy hands,
And yet perhaps more trouble is behind.                            1300
For I descry this way
Some other tending, in his hand
A Scepter or quaint staff he bears,
Comes on amain, speed in his look.
By his habit I discern him now
A Public Officer, and now at hand.
His message will be short and voluble.

Off: Ebrews, the Pris'ner Samson here I seek.

Chor:  His manacles remark him, there he sits.

Off: Samson, to thee our Lords thus bid me say;                    1310
This day to Dagon is a solemn Feast,
With Sacrifices, Triumph, Pomp, and Games;
Thy strength they know surpassing human rate,
And now some public proof thereof require
To honour this great Feast, and great Assembly;
Rise therefore with all speed and come along,
Where I will see thee heartn'd and fresh clad
To appear as fits before th' illustrious Lords.

Sam:  Thou knowst I am an Ebrew, therefore tell them,
Our Law forbids at thir Religious Rites                            1320
My presence; for that cause I cannot come.

Off: This answer, be assur'd, will not content them.

Sam:  Have they not Sword-players, and ev'ry sort
Of Gymnic Artists, Wrestlers, Riders, Runners,
Juglers and Dancers, Antics, Mummers, Mimics,
But they must pick me out with shackles tir'd,
And over-labour'd at thir publick Mill,
To make them sport with blind activity?
Do they not seek occasion of new quarrels
On my refusal to distress me more,                                 1330
Or make a game of my calamities?
Return the way thou cam'st, I will not come.

Off:  Regard thy self, this will offend them highly.

Sam: My self? my conscience and internal peace.
Can they think me so broken, so debas'd
With corporal servitude, that my mind ever
Will condescend to such absurd commands?
Although thir drudge, to be thir fool or jester,
And in my midst of sorrow and heart-grief
To shew them feats, and play before thir god,                      1340
The worst of all indignities, yet on me
Joyn'd with extream contempt? I will not come.

Off: My message was impos'd on me with speed,
Brooks no delay: is this thy resolution?

Sam:  So take it with what speed thy message needs.

Off : I am sorry what this stoutness will produce.

Sam:  Perhaps thou shalt have cause to sorrow indeed.

Chor:  Consider, Samson; matters now are strain'd
Up to the highth, whether to bold or break;
He's gone, and who knows how he may report                         1350
Thy words by adding fuel to the flame?
Expect another message more imperious,
More Lordly thund'ring then thou well wilt bear.

Sam:  Shall I abuse this Consecrated gift
Of strength, again returning with my hair
After my great transgression, so requite
Favour renew'd, and add a greater sin
By prostituting holy things to Idols;
A Nazarite in place abominable
Vaunting my strength in honour to thir Dagon?                      1360
Besides, how vile, contemptible, ridiculous,
What act more execrably unclean, prophane?

Chor:  Yet with this strength thou serv'st the Philistines,
Idolatrous, uncircumcis'd, unclean.

Sam:  Not in thir Idol-worship, but by labour
Honest and lawful to deserve my food
Of those who have me in thir civil power.

Chor:  Where the heart joins not, outward acts defile not

Sam: Where outward force constrains, the sentence holds:
But who constrains me to the Temple of Dagon,                      1370
Not dragging? the Philistian Lords command.
Commands are no constraints.  If I obey them,
I do it freely; venturing to displease
God for the fear of Man, and Man prefer,
Set God behind: which in his jealousie
Shall never, unrepented, find forgiveness.
Yet that he may dispense with me or thee
Present in Temples at Idolatrous Rites
For some important cause, thou needst not doubt.

Chor:  How thou wilt here come off surmounts my reach.             1380

Sam:  Be of good courage, I begin to feel
Some rouzing motions in me which dispose
To something extraordinary my thoughts.
I with this Messenger will go along,
Nothing to do, be sure, that may dishonour
Our Law, or stain my vow of Nazarite.
If there be aught of presage in the mind,
This day will be remarkable in my life
By some great act, or of my days the last.

Chor:  In time thou hast resolv'd, the man returns.                1390

Off: Samson, this second message from our Lords
To thee I am bid say. Art thou our Slave,
Our Captive, at the public Mill our drudge,
And dar'st thou at our sending and command
Dispute thy coming? come without delay;
Or we shall find such Engines to assail
And hamper thee, as thou shalt come of force,
Though thou wert firmlier fastn'd then a rock.

Sam:  I could be well content to try thir Art,
Which to no few of them would prove pernicious.                    1400
Yet knowing thir advantages too many,
Because they shall not trail me through thir streets
Like a wild Beast, I am content to go.
Masters commands come with a power resistless
To such as owe them absolute subjection;
And for a life who will not change his purpose?
(So mutable are all the ways of men)
Yet this be sure, in nothing to comply
Scandalous or forbidden in our Law.

Off:  I praise thy resolution, doff these links:                   1410
By this compliance thou wilt win the Lords
To favour, and perhaps to set thee free.

Sam:  Brethren farewel, your company along
I will not wish, lest it perhaps offend them
To see me girt with Friends; and how the sight
Of me as of a common Enemy,
So dreaded once, may now exasperate them
I know not.  Lords are Lordliest in thir wine,
And the well-feasted Priest then soonest fir'd
With zeal, if aught Religion seem concern'd:                       1420
No less the people on thir Holy-days
Impetuous, insolent, unquenchable;
Happ'n what may, of me expect to hear
Nothing dishonourable, impure, unworthy
Our God, our Law, my Nation, or my self,
The last of me or no I cannot warrant.

Chor:  Go, and the Holy One
Of Israel be thy guide
To what may serve his glory best, & spread his name
Great among the Heathen round:                                     1430
Send thee the Angel of thy Birth, to stand
Fast by thy side, who from thy Fathers field
Rode up in flames after his message told
Of thy conception, and be now a shield
Of fire; that Spirit that first rusht on thee
In the camp of Dan
Be efficacious in thee now at need.
For never was from Heaven imparted
Measure of strength so great to mortal seed,
As in thy wond'rous actions Hath been seen.                        1440
But wherefore comes old Manoa in such hast
With youthful steps? much livelier than e're while
He seems: supposing here to find his Son,
Or of him bringing to us some glad news?

Man:  Peace with you brethren; my inducement hither
Was not at present here to find my Son,
By order of the Lords new parted hence
To come and play before them at thir Feast.
I heard all as I came, the City rings
And numbers thither flock, I had no will,                          1450
Lest I should see him forc't to things unseemly.
But that which moved my coming now, was chiefly
To give ye part with me what hope I have
With good success to work his liberty.

Chor:  That hope would much rejoyce us to partake
With thee; say reverend Sire, we thirst to hear.

Man:  I have attempted one by one the Lords
Either at home, or through the high street passing,
With supplication prone and Fathers tears
To accept of ransom for my Son thir pris'ner,                      1460
Some much averse I found and wondrous harsh,
Contemptuous, proud, set on revenge and spite;
That part most reverenc'd Dagon and his Priests,
Others more moderate seeming, but thir aim
Private reward, for which both God and State
They easily would set to sale, a third
More generous far and civil, who confess'd
They had anough reveng'd, having reduc't
Thir foe to misery beneath thir fears,
The rest was magnanimity to remit,                                 1470
If some convenient ransom were propos'd.
What noise or shout was that? it tore the Skie.

Chor:  Doubtless the people shouting to behold
Thir once great dread, captive, & blind before them,
Or at some proof of strength before them shown.

Man:  His ransom, if my whole inheritance
May compass it, shall willingly be paid
And numberd down: much rather I shall chuse
To live the poorest in my Tribe, then richest,
And he in that calamitous prison left.                             1480
No, I am fixt not to part hence without him.
For his redemption all my Patrimony,
If need be, I am ready to forgo
And quit: not wanting him, I shall want nothing.

Chor:  Fathers are wont to lay up for thir Sons,
Thou for thy Son art bent to lay out all;
Sons wont to nurse thir Parents in old age,
Thou in old age car'st how to nurse thy Son,
Made older then thy age through eye-sight lost.

Man: It shall be my delight to tend his eyes,                      1490
And view him sitting in the house, enobl'd
With all those high exploits by him atchiev'd,
And on his shoulders waving down those locks,
That of a Nation arm'd the strength contain'd:
And I perswade me God had not permitted
His strength again to grow up with his hair
Garrison'd round about him like a Camp
Of faithful Souldiery, were not his purpose
To use him further yet in some great service,
Not to sit idle with so great a gift                               1500
Useless, and thence ridiculous about him.
And since his strength with eye-sight was not lost,
God will restore him eye-sight to his strength.

Chor:  Thy hopes are not ill founded nor seem vain
Of his delivery, and thy joy thereon
Conceiv'd, agreeable to a Fathers love,
In both which we, as next participate.

Man:  I know your friendly minds and -- O what noise!
Mercy of Heav'n what hideous noise was that!
Horribly loud unlike the former shout.                             1510

Chor:  Noise call you it or universal groan
As if the whole inhabitation perish'd,
Blood, death, and deathful deeds are in that noise,
Ruin, destruction at the utmost point.

Man:  Of ruin indeed methought I heard the noise,
Oh it continues, they have slain my Son.

Chor:  Thy Son is rather slaying them, that outcry
>From slaughter of one foe could not ascend.

Man:  Some dismal accident it needs must be;
What shall we do, stay here or run and see?                        1520

Chor:  Best keep together here, lest running thither
We unawares run into dangers mouth.
This evil on the Philistines is fall'n
>From whom could else a general cry be heard?
The sufferers then will scarce molest us here,
>From other hands we need not much to fear.
What if his eye-sight (for to Israels God
Nothing is hard) by miracle restor'd,
He now be dealing dole among his foes,
And over heaps of slaughter'd walk his way?                        1530

Man:  That were a joy presumptuous to be thought.

Chor:  Yet God hath wrought things as incredible
For his people of old; what hinders now?

Man:  He can I know, but doubt to think be will;
Yet Hope would fain subscribe, and tempts Belief.
A little stay will bring some notice hither.

Chor:  Of good or bad so great, of bad the sooner;
For evil news rides post, while good news baits.
And to our wish I see one hither speeding,
An Ebrew, as I guess, and of our Tribe.                            1540

Mess:  O whither shall I run, or which way flie
The sight of this so horrid spectacle
Which earst my eyes beheld and yet behold;
For dire imagination still persues me.
But providence or instinct of nature seems,
Or reason though disturb'd, and scarse consulted
To have guided me aright, I know not how,
To thee first reverend Manoa, and to these
My Countreymen, whom here I knew remaining,
As at some distance from the place of horrour,                     1550
So in the sad event too much concern'd.

Man:  The accident was loud, & here before thee
With rueful cry, yet what it was we hear not,
No Preface needs, thou seest we long to know.

Mess:  It would burst forth, but I recover breath
And sense distract, to know well what I utter.

Man:  Tell us the sum, the circumstance defer.

Mess:  Gaza yet stands, but all her Sons are fall'n,
All in a moment overwhelm'd and fall'n.

Man: Sad, but thou knowst to Israelites not saddest                1560
The desolation of a Hostile City.

Mess:  Feed on that first, there may in grief be surfet.

Man:  Relate by whom.
                      Mess:  By Samson.

Man:  That still lessens
The sorrow, and converts it nigh to joy.

Mess:  Ah Manoa I refrain, too suddenly
To utter what will come at last too soon;
Lest evil tidings with too rude irruption
Hitting thy aged ear should pierce too deep.

Man:  Suspense in news is torture, speak them out.

Mess:  Then take the worst in brief, Samson is dead.               1570

Man:  The worst indeed, O all my hope's defeated
To free him hence! but death who sets all free
Hath paid his ransom now and full discharge.
What windy joy this day had I conceiv'd
Hopeful of his Delivery, which now proves
Abortive as the first-born bloom of spring
Nipt with the lagging rear of winters frost.
Yet e're I give the rains to grief, say first,
How dy'd he? death to life is crown or shame.
All by him fell thou say'st, by whom fell he,                      1580
What glorious band gave Samson his deaths wound?

Mess:  Unwounded of his enemies he fell.

Man:  Wearied with slaughter then or how? explain.

Mess: By his own hands.
                       Man: Self-violence? what cause
Brought him so soon at variance with himself
Among his foes?
                Mess:  Inevitable cause
At once both to destroy and be destroy'd;
The Edifice where all were met to see him
Upon thir heads and on his own he pull'd.

Man:  O lastly over-strong against thy self!                       1590
A dreadful way thou took'st to thy revenge.
More than anough we know; but while things yet
Are in confusion, give us if thou canst,
Eye-witness of what first or last was done,
Relation more particular and distinct.

Mess:  Occasions drew me early to this City,
And as the gates I enter'd with Sun-rise,
The morning Trumpets Festival proclaim'd
Through each high street: little I had dispatch't
When all abroad was rumour'd that this day                         1600
Samson should be brought forth to shew the people
Proof of his mighty strength in feats and games;
I sorrow'd at his captive state, but minded
Not to be absent at that spectacle.
The building was a spacious Theatre
Half round on two main Pillars vaulted high,
With seats where all the Lords and each degree
Of sort, might sit in order to behold,
The other side was op'n, where the throng
On banks and scaffolds under Skie might stand;                     1610
I among these aloof obscurely stood.
The Feast and noon grew high, and Sacrifice
Had fill'd thir hearts with mirth, high chear, & wine,
When to thir sports they turn'd.  Immediately
Was Samson as a public servant brought,
In thir state Livery clad; before him Pipes
And Timbrels, on each side went armed guards,
Both horse and foot before him and behind
Archers, and Slingers, Cataphracts and Spears.
At sight of him the people with a shout                            1620
Rifted the Air clamouring thir god with praise,
Who had made thir dreadful enemy thir thrall.
He patient but undaunted where they led him.
Came to the place, and what was set before him
Which without help of eye, might be assay'd,
To heave, pull, draw, or break, he still perform'd
All with incredible, stupendious force,
None daring to appear Antagonist.
At length for intermission sake they led him
Between the pillars; he his guide requested                        1630
(For so from such as nearer stood we heard)
As over-tir'd to let him lean a while
With both his arms on those two massie Pillars
That to the arched roof gave main support.
He unsuspitious led him; which when Samson
Felt in his arms, with head a while enclin'd,
And eyes fast fixt he stood, as one who pray'd,
Or some great matter in his mind revolv'd.
At last with head erect thus cryed aloud,
Hitherto, Lords, what your commands impos'd                        1640
I have perform'd, as reason was, obeying,
Not without wonder or delight beheld.
Now of my own accord such other tryal
I mean to shew you of my strength, yet greater;
As with amaze shall strike all who behold.
This utter'd, straining all his nerves he bow'd,
As with the force of winds and waters pent,
When Mountains tremble, those two massie Pillars
With horrible convulsion to and fro,
He tugg'd, he shook, till down they came and drew                  1650
The whole roof after them, with burst of thunder
Upon the heads of all who sate beneath,
Lords, Ladies, Captains, Councellors, or Priests,
Thir choice nobility and flower, not only
Of this but each Philistian City round
Met from all parts to solemnize this Feast.
Samson with these immixt, inevitably
Pulld down the same destruction on himself;
The vulgar only scap'd who stood without.

Chor:  O dearly-bought revenge, yet glorious!                      1660
Living or dying thou hast fulfill'd
The work for which thou wast foretold
To Israel and now ly'st victorious
Among thy slain self-kill'd
Not willingly, but tangl'd in the fold
Of dire necessity, whose law in death conjoin'd
Thee with thy slaughter'd foes in number more
Then all thy life had slain before.

Semichor:  While thir hearts were jocund and sublime
Drunk with Idolatry, drunk with Wine,                              1670
And fat regorg'd of Bulls and Goats,
Chaunting thir Idol, and preferring
Before our living Dread who dwells
In Silo his bright Sanctuary:
Among them he a spirit of phrenzie sent,
Who hurt thir minds,
And urg'd them on with mad desire
To call in hast for thir destroyer;
They only set on sport and play
Unweetingly importun'd                                             1680
Thir own destruction to come speedy upon them.
So fond are mortal men
Fall'n into wrath divine,
As thir own ruin on themselves to invite,
Insensate left, or to sense reprobate,
And with blindness internal struck.

Semichor:  But he though blind of sight,
Despis'd and thought extinguish't quite,
With inward eyes illuminated
His fierie vertue rouz'd                                           1690
>From under ashes into sudden flame,
And as an ev'ning Dragon came,
Assailant on the perched roosts,
And nests in order rang'd
Of tame villatic Fowl; but as an Eagle
His cloudless thunder bolted on thir heads.
So vertue giv'n for lost,
Deprest, and overthrown, as seem'd,
Like that self-begott'n bird
In the Arabian woods embost,                                       1700
That no second knows nor third,
And lay e're while a Holocaust,
>From out her ashie womb now teem'd
Revives, reflourishes, then vigorous most
When most unactive deem'd,
And though her body die, her fame survives,
A secular bird ages of lives.

Man:  Come, come, no time for lamentation now,
Nor much more cause, Samson hath quit himself
Like Samson, and heroicly hath finish'd                            1710
A life Heroic, on his Enemies
Fully reveng'd, hath left them years of mourning,
And lamentation to the Sons of Caphtor
Through all Philistian bounds. To Israel
Honour hath left, and freedom, let but them
Find courage to lay hold on this occasion,
To himself and Fathers house eternal fame;
And which is best and happiest yet, all this
With God not parted from him, as was feard,
But favouring and assisting to the end.                            1720
Nothing is here for tears, nothing to wail
Or knock the breast, no weakness, no contempt,
Dispraise, or blame, nothing but well and fair,
And what may quiet us in a death so noble.
Let us go find the body where it lies
Sok't in his enemies blood, and from the stream
With lavers pure and cleansing herbs wash off
The clotted gore.  I with what speed the while
(Gaza is not in plight to say us nay)
Will send for all my kindred, all my friends                       1730
To fetch him hence and solemnly attend
With silent obsequie and funeral train
Home to his Fathers house: there will I build him
A Monument, and plant it round with shade
Of Laurel ever green, and branching Palm,
With all his Trophies hung, and Acts enroll'd
In copious Legend, or sweet Lyric Song.
Thither shall all the valiant youth resort,
And from his memory inflame thir breasts
To matchless valour, and adventures high:                          1740
The Virgins also shall on feastful days
Visit his Tomb with flowers, only bewailing
His lot unfortunate in nuptial choice,
>From whence captivity and loss of eyes.

Chor:  All is best, though we oft doubt,
What th' unsearchable dispose
Of highest wisdom brings about,
And ever best found in the close.
Oft he seems to hide his face,
But unexpectedly returns                                           1750
And to his faithful Champion hath in place
Bore witness gloriously; whence Gaza mourns
And all that band them to resist
His uncontroulable intent,
His servants he with new acquist
Of true experience from this great event
With peace and consolation hath dismist,
And calm of mind all passion spent.

The End.




APPENDIX.

Specimen of Milton's spelling, from the Cambridge autograph
manuscript.


ON TIME

set on a clock case

Fly envious Time till thou run out thy race
call on the lazie leaden-stepping howres
whose speed is but the heavie plummets pace
& glut thy selfe wth what thy womb devoures
Wch is no more then what is false & vaine
& meerly mortall drosse
so little is our losse
so little is thy gaine
for when as each thing bad thou hast entomb'd
& last of all thy greedie selfe consum'd                             10
then long Aeternity shall greet our blisse
wth an individuall kisse
and Joy shall overtake us as a flood
when every thing yt is sincerely good
& pfectly divine
with Truth, & Peace, & Love shall ever shine
about the supreme throne
of him t' whose happy-making sight alone
when once our heav'nly-guided soule shall clime
then all this earthie grossnesse quit                                20
attir'd wth starres wee shall for ever sit
Triumphing over Death, & Chance, & thee O Time.

This edition of Milton's Poetry is a reprint, as careful as Editor
and Printers have been able to make it, from the earliest printed
copies of the several poems.  First the 1645 volume of the
Minor Poems has been printed entire; then follow in order the
poems added in the reissue of 1673; the Paradise Lost, from the
edition of 1667; and the Paradise Regain'd and Samson
Agonistes from the edition of 1671.

The most interesting portion of the book must be reckoned the
first section of it, which reproduces for the first time the scarce
small octavo of 1645.  The only reprint of the Minor Poems in
the old spelling, so far as I know, is the one edited by Mitford,
but that followed the edition of 1673, which is comparatively
uninteresting since it could not have had Milton's oversight as it
passed through the press.  We know that it was set up from a
copy of the 1645 edition, because it reproduces some pointless
eccentricities such as the varying form of the chorus to Psalm
cxxxvi; but while it corrects the errata tabulated in that edition
it commits many more blunders of its own.  It is valuable,
however, as the editio princeps of ten of the sonnets and it
contains one important alteration in the Ode on the Nativity.
This and all other alterations will be found noted where they
occur.  I have not thought it necessary to note mere differences
of spelling between the two editions but a word may find place
here upon their general character.  Generally it may be said that,
where the two editions differ, the later spelling is that now in
use.  Thus words like goddess, darkness, usually written in the
first edition with one final s, have two, while on the  other hand
words like vernall, youthfull, and monosyllables like hugg, farr,
lose their double letter.  Many monosyllables, e.g. som, cours,
glimps, wher, vers, aw, els, don, ey, ly, so written in 1645, take
on in 1673 an e mute, while words like harpe, windes, onely,
lose it. By a reciprocal change ayr and cipress become air and
cypress; and the vowels in daign, vail, neer, beleeve, sheild,
boosom, eeven, battail, travailer, and many other words are
similarly modernized.  On the other hand there are a few cases
where the 1645 edition exhibits the spelling which has
succeeded in fixing itself, as travail (1673, travel) in the sense of
labour; and rob'd, profane, human, flood and bloody, forest,
triple, alas, huddling, are found where the 1673 edition has
roab'd, prophane, humane, floud and bloudy, forrest, tripple,
alass and hudling.  Indeed the spelling in this later edition is not
untouched by seventeenth century inconsistency.  It retains here
and there forms like shameles, cateres, (where 1645 reads
cateress), and occasionally reverts to the older-fashioned
spelling of monosyllables without the mute e.  In the Epitaph on
the Marchioness of Winchester, it reads --' And som flowers
and some bays.'  But undoubtedly the impression on the whole
is of a much more modern text.

In the matter of small or capital letters I have followed the old
copy, except in one or two places where a personification
seemed not plainly enough marked to a modern reader without
a capital. Thus in Il Penseroso, l. 49, I print Leasure, although
both editions read leasure; and in the Vacation Exercise, l. 71,
Times for times. Also where the employment or omission of a
capital is plainly due to misprinting, as too frequently in the
1673 edition, I silently make the correction.  Examples are,
notes for Notes in Sonnet xvii. l. 13; Anointed for anointed in
Psalm  ii. l.12.

In regard to punctuation I have followed the old printers except
in obvious misprints, and followed them also, as far as possible,
in their distribution of roman and italic type and in the grouping
of words and lines in the various titles. To follow them exactly
was impossible, as the  books are so very different in size.

At this point the candid reader may perhaps ask what advantage
is gained by presenting these poems to modern readers in the
dress of a bygone age.  If the question were put to me I should
probably evade it by pointing out that Mr. Frowde is issuing an
edition based upon this, in which the spelling is frankly that of
to-day.  But if the question were pressed, I think a sufficient
answer might be found.  To begin with, I should point out that
even Prof. Masson, who in his excellent edition argues the
point and decides in favour of modern spelling, allows that there
are peculiarities of Milton's spelling which are really  significant,
and ought therefore to be noted or preserved.  But who is to
determine exactly which words are spelt according to the poet's
own instructions, and which according to the printer's whim?  It
is notorious that in Paradise Lost some words were spelt upon a
deliberate system, and it may very well happen that in the
volume of minor poems which the poet saw through the press in
1645, there were spellings no less systematic.  Prof. Masson
makes a great point of the fact that Milton's own spelling,
exhibited in the autograph manuscript of some of the minor
poems preserved in Trinity College, Cambridge, does not
correspond with that of the printed copy. [Note: This
manuscript, invaluable to all students of Milton, has lately been
facsimiled under the superintendence of Dr. Aldis Wright, and
published at the Cambridge University press].  This is certainly
true, as the reader may see for himself by comparing the
passage from the manuscript given in the appendix with the
corresponding place in the text.  Milton's own spelling revels in
redundant e's, while the printer of the 1645 book is very sparing
of them.  But in cases where the spelling affects the metre, we
find that the printed text and Milton's manuscript closely
correspond; and it is upon its value in determining the metre,
quite as much as its antiquarian interest, that I should base a
justification of this reprint.  Take, for instance, such a line as the
eleventh of Comus, which Prof. Masson gives as:-

        Amongst the enthroned gods on sainted seats.

A reader not learned in Miltonic rhythms will certainly read this

        Amongst th' enthroned gods

But the 1645 edition reads:

        Amongst the enthron'd gods

and so does Milton's manuscript.  Again, in line 597, Prof.
Masson reads:

        It shall be in eternal restless change
        Self-fed and self-consumed.  If this fail,
        The pillared firmament is rottenness,  &c.

But the 1645 text and Milton's manuscript read self-consum'd;
after which word there is to be understood a metrical pause to
mark the violent transition of the thought.

Again in the second line of the Sonnet to a Nightingale Prof.
Masson has:

        Warblest at eve when all the woods are still

but the early edition, which probably follows Milton's spelling
though in this case we have no manuscript to compare, reads
'Warbl'st.' So the original text of Samson, l. 670, has 'temper'st.'

The retention of the old system of punctuation may be less
defensible, but I have retained it because it may now and then
be of use in determining a point of syntax.  The absence of a
comma, for example, after the word hearse in the 58th line of
the Epitaph on the Marchioness of Winchester, printed by Prof.
Masson thus:--

        And some flowers, and some bays
        For thy hearse to strew thy ways,

but in the 1645 edition:--

        And som Flowers, and som Bays,
        For thy Hears to strew the ways,

goes to prove that for here must be taken as 'fore.

Of the Paradise Lost there were two editions issued during
Milton's lifetime, and while the first has been taken as our text,
all the variants in the second, not being simple misprints, have
been recorded in the notes.  In one respect, however, in the
distribution of the poem into twelve books instead of ten, it has
seemed best, for the sake of practical convenience, to follow the
second edition.  A word may be allowed here on the famous
correction among the Errata prefixed to the first edition:  'Lib.
2. v. 414, for we read wee.'  This correction shows not only that
Milton had theories about spelling, but also that he found
means, though his sight was gone, to ascertain whether his rules
had been carried out by his printer; and in itself this fact justifies
a facsimile reprint.  What the principle in the use of the double
vowel exactly was (and it is found to affect the other
monosyllabic pronouns) it is not so easy to discover, though
roughly it is clear the reduplication was intended to mark
emphasis.  For example, in the speech of the Divine Son after
the battle in heaven (vi. 810-817) the pronouns which the voice
would naturally emphasize are spelt with the double vowel:

                                 Stand onely and behold
        Gods indignation on these Godless pourd
        By mee; not you but mee they have despis'd,
        Yet envied; against mee is all thir rage,
        Because the Father, t'whom in Heav'n supream
        Kingdom and Power and Glorie appertains,
        Hath honourd me according to his will.
        Therefore to mee thir doom he hath assign'd.

In the Son's speech offering himself as Redeemer (iii. 227-249)
where the pronoun all through is markedly emphasized, it is
printed mee the first four times, and afterwards me; but it is
noticeable that these first four times the emphatic word does
not stand in the stressed place of the verse, so that a careless
reader might not emphasize it, unless his attention were
specially led by some such sign:

        Behold mee then, mee for him, life for life
        I offer, on mee let thine anger fall;
        Account mee man.

In the Hymn of Creation (v.160-209) where ye occurs fourteen
times, the emphasis and the metric stress six times out of seven
coincide, and the pronoun is spelt yee; where it is unemphatic,
and in an unstressed place, it is spelt ye. Two lines are especially
instructive:
Speak yee who best can tell, ye Sons of light (l. 160);

and

        Fountains and yee, that warble, as ye flow,
        Melodious murmurs, warbling tune his praise (l. 195).

In v. 694 it marks, as the voice by its emphasis would mark in
reading, a change of subject:

        So spake the false Arch-Angel, and infus'd
        Bad influence into th' unwarie brest
        Of his Associate; hee (i. e. the associate) together calls,
&c.

An examination of other passages, where there is no antithesis,
goes to show that the lengthened form of the pronoun is most
frequent before a pause (as vii. 95); or at the end of a line (i.
245, 257); or when a foot is inverted (v. 133); or when as
object it  precedes its verb (v. 612; vii. 747), or as subject
follows it (ix. 1109; x. 4).  But as we might expect under
circumstances where a purist could not correct his own proofs,
there are not a few inconsistencies.  There does not seem, for
example, any special emphasis in the second wee of the
following passage:

                                        Freely we serve.
        Because wee freely love, as in our will
        To love or not; in this we stand or fall  (v. 538).